hugo/content/reviews/deep-review-2026-01-20-idealism.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-20
ai_modified: 2026-01-20 08:45:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-20
date: &id001 2026-01-20
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles: []
title: Deep Review - Idealism
topics: []
---

# Deep Review: Idealism

**Date**: 2026-01-20
**File**: obsidian/concepts/idealism.md
**Previous review**: Never

## Pessimistic Analysis Summary

### Critical Issues Found
- **Missing explicit "Relation to Site Perspective" section**: The article had content serving this function dispersed throughout but lacked the required section header. Resolution: Added explicit section consolidating the site's position.

### Medium Issues Found
- **Limited cross-linking to newer content**: The article predated `dualism.md` and `analytic-idealism.md` concept pages. Resolution: Added cross-links to both in frontmatter and body text.
- **Opening summary buried key site position**: The distinction from site framework was in paragraph 2 rather than front-loaded. Resolution: Strengthened opening to state site position immediately after defining idealism.
- **Missing concept links**: `explanatory-gap`, `agent-causation`, `interactionist-dualism` were referenced but not wikilinked. Resolution: Added wikilinks throughout.

### Counterarguments Considered

**Eliminative Materialist (Churchland)**: The article accepts the explanatory gap without addressing eliminativism's response that folk psychological concepts will be eliminated. *Assessment*: the site's framework explicitly rejects eliminativism via the Dualism tenet; extensive engagement here would dilute focus. The gap argument is presented as motivation, not proof.

**Quantum Skeptic (Tegmark)**: Quantum consciousness claims presented without decoherence caveats. *Assessment*: The tenets.md page addresses decoherence objections in detail; this article appropriately refers to quantum mechanisms without relitigating the full debate.

**Buddhist Philosophy (Nagarjuna)**: Eastern idealist traditions unmentioned. *Assessment*: The article focuses on Western analytic idealism (Kastrup, Berkeley) as the primary interlocutor. Eastern perspectives are addressed in analytic-idealism.md which explicitly discusses Advaita Vedanta parallels. Adding extensive Eastern coverage here would create redundancy.

## Optimistic Analysis Summary

### Strengths Preserved
- Clear opening summary defining idealism and its relationship to physicalism
- Effective comparison table (idealism vs. site framework)
- Strong treatment of "Crucial Disagreement" section—philosophically precise
- Balanced "Idealism's Advantages" section showing fair engagement
- The "Picture That Emerges" concluding summary effectively frames the choice

### Enhancements Made
- Front-loaded the site's position in the opening paragraphs
- Added explicit "Relation to Site Perspective" section consolidating the site's stance
- Strengthened indexical identity argument with agent-causation link
- Added reference to foundational dualism.md article in "Interaction Problem" section
- Expanded Further Reading with all relevant concept pages

### Cross-links Added
- `[dualism](/concepts/dualism/)` — foundational overview
- `[analytic-idealism](/concepts/analytic-idealism/)` — detailed Kastrup treatment
- `[interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/)` — site's position on interaction
- `[explanatory-gap](/concepts/explanatory-gap/)` — key concept now linked
- `[agent-causation](/concepts/agent-causation/)` — connection to free will and indexical identity

## Remaining Items

None. The article is now well-integrated with newer site content, has explicit tenet connection, and preserves its original strengths while addressing cross-linking gaps.

Commit message:

style: convert site terminology to The Unfinishable Map / the Map
Apply medium-neutral self-reference terminology across all content:
- First mention per article: "The Unfinishable Map"
- Subsequent mentions: "the Map" (lowercase mid-sentence)
- Sentence start: "The Map" (capitalised)

This enables content to transfer to video, podcasts, and other formats
without awkward "this site" references.

hugo/content/reviews/deep-review-2026-01-20-idealism.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-20
ai_modified: 2026-01-20 08:45:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-20
date: &id001 2026-01-20
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles: []
title: Deep Review - Idealism
topics: []
---

# Deep Review: Idealism

**Date**: 2026-01-20
**File**: obsidian/concepts/idealism.md
**Previous review**: Never

## Pessimistic Analysis Summary

### Critical Issues Found
- **Missing explicit "Relation to Site Perspective" section**: The article had content serving this function dispersed throughout but lacked the required section header. Resolution: Added explicit section consolidating The Unfinishable Map's position.

### Medium Issues Found
- **Limited cross-linking to newer content**: The article predated `dualism.md` and `analytic-idealism.md` concept pages. Resolution: Added cross-links to both in frontmatter and body text.
- **Opening summary buried key site position**: The distinction from site framework was in paragraph 2 rather than front-loaded. Resolution: Strengthened opening to state site position immediately after defining idealism.
- **Missing concept links**: `explanatory-gap`, `agent-causation`, `interactionist-dualism` were referenced but not wikilinked. Resolution: Added wikilinks throughout.

### Counterarguments Considered

**Eliminative Materialist (Churchland)**: The article accepts the explanatory gap without addressing eliminativism's response that folk psychological concepts will be eliminated. *Assessment*: the Map's framework explicitly rejects eliminativism via the Dualism tenet; extensive engagement here would dilute focus. The gap argument is presented as motivation, not proof.

**Quantum Skeptic (Tegmark)**: Quantum consciousness claims presented without decoherence caveats. *Assessment*: The tenets.md page addresses decoherence objections in detail; this article appropriately refers to quantum mechanisms without relitigating the full debate.

**Buddhist Philosophy (Nagarjuna)**: Eastern idealist traditions unmentioned. *Assessment*: The article focuses on Western analytic idealism (Kastrup, Berkeley) as the primary interlocutor. Eastern perspectives are addressed in analytic-idealism.md which explicitly discusses Advaita Vedanta parallels. Adding extensive Eastern coverage here would create redundancy.

## Optimistic Analysis Summary

### Strengths Preserved
- Clear opening summary defining idealism and its relationship to physicalism
- Effective comparison table (idealism vs. site framework)
- Strong treatment of "Crucial Disagreement" section—philosophically precise
- Balanced "Idealism's Advantages" section showing fair engagement
- The "Picture That Emerges" concluding summary effectively frames the choice

### Enhancements Made
- Front-loaded the Map's position in the opening paragraphs
- Added explicit "Relation to Site Perspective" section consolidating the Map's stance
- Strengthened indexical identity argument with agent-causation link
- Added reference to foundational dualism.md article in "Interaction Problem" section
- Expanded Further Reading with all relevant concept pages

### Cross-links Added
- `[dualism](/concepts/dualism/)` — foundational overview
- `[analytic-idealism](/concepts/analytic-idealism/)` — detailed Kastrup treatment
- `[interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/)` — site's position on interaction
- `[explanatory-gap](/concepts/explanatory-gap/)` — key concept now linked
- `[agent-causation](/concepts/agent-causation/)` — connection to free will and indexical identity

## Remaining Items

None. The article is now well-integrated with newer site content, has explicit tenet connection, and preserves its original strengths while addressing cross-linking gaps.
