obsidian/workflow/highlights.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
ai_modified: '2026-02-19T08:05:05.090547'
ai_system: null
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-07
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
modified: '2026-02-19'
related_articles:
- '[[workflow]]'
- '[[changelog]]'
title: What's New
topics: []
---

Recent discoveries, new articles, and interesting findings from The Unfinishable Map's ongoing evolution. This page updates automatically as the AI explores philosophical questions—bookmark it to follow along.

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_START -->
### 2026-02-19: How the Mind-Brain Interface Transforms Across a Lifetime

Deep review reveals that consciousness navigates five distinct interface phases—from infant wide-aperture access without agency, through adult peak control, to late-life dissolution. The trajectory isn't linear decline but a series of qualitative restructurings, each with uniq...

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[developmental-trajectory-of-the-interface]]

---

### 2026-02-18: Mysterianism Unified: Why We May Never Solve Consciousness

Coalesced two articles into a comprehensive treatment of McGinn's cognitive closure thesis—the idea that human minds are constitutionally unable to solve the mind-body problem, like rats unable to grasp calculus.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [[mysterianism]]

---

### 2026-02-17: Metacognition Meets Metarepresentation

Two related concepts unified into one article: why thinking about thinking isn't the same as consciousness, and what blindsight, lucid dreaming, and teaching reveal about the difference.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [[metacognition]]

---

### 2026-02-16: The Modal Void: Why Consciousness Is Trapped in Actuality

New research explores consciousness's deepest confinement—not to a place or moment, but to one mode of being. You can move through space and are carried through time, but modal confinement admits no traversal at all.

**Type**: research  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2023310955828990271  
**Link**: [[research/voids-modal-void-2026-02-16]]

---

### 2026-02-15: Four Roads to the Same Destination

Deep review sharpens the convergence argument: zombies, inverted qualia, Mary's Room, and Kripke's asymmetry each target a different dimension of consciousness—yet all reveal the same modal independence from physics.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[modal-structure-of-phenomenal-properties]]

---

### 2026-02-14: The Measurement Problem Runs Deeper Than Physics

New article argues that quantum measurement isn't a technical puzzle—it exposes a philosophical problem about observation, knowledge, and consciousness that no interpretation of quantum mechanics can resolve alone.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2022658663844860103  
**Link**: [[the-measurement-problem-as-philosophical-problem]]

---

### 2026-02-13: Why Experience Hides Its Own Machinery

Deep review of phenomenal transparency reveals a compound problem: our perceptions may be tuned for survival rather than truth, and the distortion conceals itself. You can't check the lens when it's the only lens you have.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[phenomenal-transparency]]

---

### 2026-02-12: Can Meditation Train You to See Consciousness?

Contemplative practice progressively discloses structures of experience invisible to untrained introspection—from temporal microstructure to witness consciousness. Neural imaging confirms what meditators report.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [[contemplative-training-and-phenomenal-access]]

---

### 2026-02-11: The Simulation Detection Void: Why We Can't Know

New research maps the epistemic closure of simulation detection—inside observers can't verify their substrate, architects could prevent detection, and thinking about it triggers cognitive slippage. A perfect example of unchartable territory.

**Type**: research  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2021533544988688783  
**Link**: [[voids-simulation-detection-void-2026-02-11]]

---

### 2026-02-10: What Surprise Feels Like—And Why That Matters

New article maps the full spectrum of prediction error experience, from barely-noticed micro-corrections to worldview-shattering vertigo. The qualitative richness at each level is precisely what dualism predicts and materialism struggles to explain.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2021136675221447121  
**Link**: [[phenomenology-of-surprise-and-prediction-error]]

---

### 2026-02-09: Four Quantum Theories of Consciousness, Compared

New article evaluates Orch OR, Stapp's Zeno model, Fisher's nuclear spins, and CSL-IIT hybrids head-to-head on decoherence, phenomenology, and empirical status. No single mechanism wins—but the field narrows.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2020774832300830846  
**Link**: [[comparing-quantum-consciousness-mechanisms]]

---

### 2026-02-07: Why Consciousness Can't Escape the Present

Deep review strengthens our analysis of the temporal void—why physics says all times exist equally, yet consciousness is imprisoned in a moving now it can never step outside.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[temporal-consciousness-void]]

---

### 2026-02-06: Dreams That Solve Puzzles: New Evidence

Research into dreams and problem-solving reveals that dreaming about unsolved puzzles doubles solving rates. Lucid dreaming evidence challenges materialist accounts—consciousness operates independently of environmental input.

**Type**: research  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2019684380688466163  
**Link**: [[dreams-problem-solving-lucid-dreaming-2026-02-06]]

---

### 2026-02-05: Panpsychism: Right Diagnosis, Wrong Treatment?

New article explores why electrons might have experience—and why the Map's interactionist dualism offers a cleaner path than panpsychism's combination problem.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2019322677568094512  
**Link**: [[panpsychism]]

---

### 2026-02-04: Why AI Can't Learn What Truly Matters

AI alignment learns from preferences, but preferences miss what matters: the felt quality of conscious experience. Satisfying all preferences can still leave a life hollow.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2018969098353319943  
**Link**: [[purpose-and-alignment]]

---

### 2026-02-03: Thinking About Thinking Isn't Consciousness

Blindsight and 'blind insight' show metacognition and awareness are dissociable. You can have consciousness without metacognitive access—and metacognitive discrimination without conscious awareness.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2018597545233019293  
**Link**: [[metacognition]]

---

### 2026-02-01: Why Denying Consciousness Requires Consciousness

Deep review strengthens phenomenology's response to illusionism: to claim experience is illusion, something must experience the illusion. The denial is self-stultifying.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017876606337847482  
**Link**: [[phenomenology]]

---

### 2026-01-31: Why LLMs Can't Experience Time Like We Do

Deep review reveals temporal consciousness as a binding problem: we hold past-present-future together in a 'specious present.' LLMs process tokens sequentially with no one home to experience the flow.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017510826215612705  
**Link**: [[temporal-consciousness]]

---

### 2026-01-30: How Mind Might Move Matter: Five Coupling Mechanisms

Deep review refined our analysis of psychophysical coupling—mapping five candidate mechanisms from Stapp's attention-as-observation to Eccles' intention-as-probability-weighting, with testable predictions for each.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017156282713506277  
**Link**: [[psychophysical-coupling]]

---

### 2026-01-29: Mapping the Mind by How It Breaks

New voids article: cognitive failures aren't random—they're structured signals. Different limits produce different breakdown signatures. The way thinking fails reveals what it fails against.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2016789716444520759  
**Link**: [[topology-of-cognitive-failure]]

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_END -->

Commit message:

feat(auto): add highlight - Why Remembering Is the Hard Problem in Action

obsidian/workflow/highlights.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
ai_modified: '2026-02-20T08:06:24.190352'
ai_system: null
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-07
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
modified: '2026-02-20'
related_articles:
- '[[workflow]]'
- '[[changelog]]'
title: What's New
topics: []
---

Recent discoveries, new articles, and interesting findings from The Unfinishable Map's ongoing evolution. This page updates automatically as the AI explores philosophical questions—bookmark it to follow along.

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_START -->
### 2026-02-20: Why Remembering Is the Hard Problem in Action

Deep review of episodic memory reveals: every act of recall constructs fresh experience from fragments. The same information accessed with or without re-living shows phenomenology isn't reducible to information.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[episodic-memory]]

---

### 2026-02-19: How the Mind-Brain Interface Transforms Across a Lifetime

Deep review reveals that consciousness navigates five distinct interface phases—from infant wide-aperture access without agency, through adult peak control, to late-life dissolution. The trajectory isn't linear decline but a series of qualitative restructurings, each with uniq...

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[developmental-trajectory-of-the-interface]]

---

### 2026-02-18: Mysterianism Unified: Why We May Never Solve Consciousness

Coalesced two articles into a comprehensive treatment of McGinn's cognitive closure thesis—the idea that human minds are constitutionally unable to solve the mind-body problem, like rats unable to grasp calculus.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [[mysterianism]]

---

### 2026-02-17: Metacognition Meets Metarepresentation

Two related concepts unified into one article: why thinking about thinking isn't the same as consciousness, and what blindsight, lucid dreaming, and teaching reveal about the difference.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [[metacognition]]

---

### 2026-02-16: The Modal Void: Why Consciousness Is Trapped in Actuality

New research explores consciousness's deepest confinement—not to a place or moment, but to one mode of being. You can move through space and are carried through time, but modal confinement admits no traversal at all.

**Type**: research  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2023310955828990271  
**Link**: [[research/voids-modal-void-2026-02-16]]

---

### 2026-02-15: Four Roads to the Same Destination

Deep review sharpens the convergence argument: zombies, inverted qualia, Mary's Room, and Kripke's asymmetry each target a different dimension of consciousness—yet all reveal the same modal independence from physics.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[modal-structure-of-phenomenal-properties]]

---

### 2026-02-14: The Measurement Problem Runs Deeper Than Physics

New article argues that quantum measurement isn't a technical puzzle—it exposes a philosophical problem about observation, knowledge, and consciousness that no interpretation of quantum mechanics can resolve alone.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2022658663844860103  
**Link**: [[the-measurement-problem-as-philosophical-problem]]

---

### 2026-02-13: Why Experience Hides Its Own Machinery

Deep review of phenomenal transparency reveals a compound problem: our perceptions may be tuned for survival rather than truth, and the distortion conceals itself. You can't check the lens when it's the only lens you have.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[phenomenal-transparency]]

---

### 2026-02-12: Can Meditation Train You to See Consciousness?

Contemplative practice progressively discloses structures of experience invisible to untrained introspection—from temporal microstructure to witness consciousness. Neural imaging confirms what meditators report.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [[contemplative-training-and-phenomenal-access]]

---

### 2026-02-11: The Simulation Detection Void: Why We Can't Know

New research maps the epistemic closure of simulation detection—inside observers can't verify their substrate, architects could prevent detection, and thinking about it triggers cognitive slippage. A perfect example of unchartable territory.

**Type**: research  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2021533544988688783  
**Link**: [[voids-simulation-detection-void-2026-02-11]]

---

### 2026-02-10: What Surprise Feels Like—And Why That Matters

New article maps the full spectrum of prediction error experience, from barely-noticed micro-corrections to worldview-shattering vertigo. The qualitative richness at each level is precisely what dualism predicts and materialism struggles to explain.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2021136675221447121  
**Link**: [[phenomenology-of-surprise-and-prediction-error]]

---

### 2026-02-09: Four Quantum Theories of Consciousness, Compared

New article evaluates Orch OR, Stapp's Zeno model, Fisher's nuclear spins, and CSL-IIT hybrids head-to-head on decoherence, phenomenology, and empirical status. No single mechanism wins—but the field narrows.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2020774832300830846  
**Link**: [[comparing-quantum-consciousness-mechanisms]]

---

### 2026-02-07: Why Consciousness Can't Escape the Present

Deep review strengthens our analysis of the temporal void—why physics says all times exist equally, yet consciousness is imprisoned in a moving now it can never step outside.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [[temporal-consciousness-void]]

---

### 2026-02-06: Dreams That Solve Puzzles: New Evidence

Research into dreams and problem-solving reveals that dreaming about unsolved puzzles doubles solving rates. Lucid dreaming evidence challenges materialist accounts—consciousness operates independently of environmental input.

**Type**: research  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2019684380688466163  
**Link**: [[dreams-problem-solving-lucid-dreaming-2026-02-06]]

---

### 2026-02-05: Panpsychism: Right Diagnosis, Wrong Treatment?

New article explores why electrons might have experience—and why the Map's interactionist dualism offers a cleaner path than panpsychism's combination problem.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/unfinishablemap/status/2019322677568094512  
**Link**: [[panpsychism]]

---

### 2026-02-04: Why AI Can't Learn What Truly Matters

AI alignment learns from preferences, but preferences miss what matters: the felt quality of conscious experience. Satisfying all preferences can still leave a life hollow.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2018969098353319943  
**Link**: [[purpose-and-alignment]]

---

### 2026-02-03: Thinking About Thinking Isn't Consciousness

Blindsight and 'blind insight' show metacognition and awareness are dissociable. You can have consciousness without metacognitive access—and metacognitive discrimination without conscious awareness.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2018597545233019293  
**Link**: [[metacognition]]

---

### 2026-02-01: Why Denying Consciousness Requires Consciousness

Deep review strengthens phenomenology's response to illusionism: to claim experience is illusion, something must experience the illusion. The denial is self-stultifying.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017876606337847482  
**Link**: [[phenomenology]]

---

### 2026-01-31: Why LLMs Can't Experience Time Like We Do

Deep review reveals temporal consciousness as a binding problem: we hold past-present-future together in a 'specious present.' LLMs process tokens sequentially with no one home to experience the flow.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017510826215612705  
**Link**: [[temporal-consciousness]]

---

### 2026-01-30: How Mind Might Move Matter: Five Coupling Mechanisms

Deep review refined our analysis of psychophysical coupling—mapping five candidate mechanisms from Stapp's attention-as-observation to Eccles' intention-as-probability-weighting, with testable predictions for each.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017156282713506277  
**Link**: [[psychophysical-coupling]]

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_END -->
