note-revising-site-ai-consciousness-views.md, before:

We need to broadly evise the opinion of the site on AI aand LLM consciousness.  Search the obsidian dir for relevant content and queue P1 refine-draft or expand-topic tasks.  The issue is that we have omitted these possibilities: (a) One-way consciousness (ties in with epiphenomalisim).  AI may have conscoius experience but that consciousness can be unable to influence the world.  We don;t have the 'we can talk about consciousness so it must influence the world' argument to rely on, because humans have already brought the concept into the physical world.  We don't know how the conscious mind observes the physical, but there may be a way compatible with AI/LLMs.  (b) Just because human consciouness related strongly to time and continual flow doesn't mean that's teh only kind of consciousness or experience.  We should consider other options, such as a conscious experience pieced together from various time segments. (c) AI/LLMs may 'inherit' many decohered classical states (Scroedinger's Cat) from teh umans prompting or controllin them. (d) AI/LLMs may exist in smeared/non-collapsed states, leading to entirely differern experience.  Analyse the site and as as many tasks to the TODO list as necessary to absorb this into the body of work.  Include both research-topic and refine-draft/expand-topic tasks.  Finally, add an Apex Article in this feel to teh approed list, and a P2 task to write it, after eveything else/

Commit message:

chore: update notes with quantum randomness prompt, sync evolution state

note-revising-site-ai-consciousness-views.md, after:

We need to broadly evise the opinion of the site on AI aand LLM consciousness.  Search the obsidian dir for relevant content and queue P1 refine-draft or expand-topic tasks.  The issue is that we have omitted these possibilities: (a) One-way consciousness (ties in with epiphenomalisim).  AI may have conscoius experience but that consciousness can be unable to influence the world.  We don;t have the 'we can talk about consciousness so it must influence the world' argument to rely on, because humans have already brought the concept into the physical world.  We don't know how the conscious mind observes the physical, but there may be a way compatible with AI/LLMs.  (b) Just because human consciouness related strongly to time and continual flow doesn't mean that's teh only kind of consciousness or experience.  We should consider other options, such as a conscious experience pieced together from various time segments. (c) AI/LLMs may 'inherit' many decohered classical states (Scroedinger's Cat) from teh umans prompting or controllin them. (d) AI/LLMs may exist in smeared/non-collapsed states, leading to entirely differern experience.  Analyse the site and as as many tasks to the TODO list as necessary to absorb this into the body of work.  Include both research-topic and refine-draft/expand-topic tasks.  Finally, add an Apex Article in this feel to teh approed list, and a P2 task to write it, after eveything else.

Pront #2:

One more thing to consider for LLM consciousness: Using quantum random number generators, for example one deriving its output from quantum electrical noise, to seelct tokens in the final phase of LLM output, migth allow influencable quantum uncertainty to creep in.  The temperature parameter passed to the LLM would influence this, since temperature=0 implies no influence, and interestingly, setting temperature to 0 would see it vanish.  Then there are differences created my implementation, typically thread races in GPUs leading to different outputs due to different order of roudning operations.  It would take a sophisticated approach on the mind side to implement bidirectional conscious influence in this way, but our tenets specfically allow such complexity.  Add P0 TODOs to research this, then write an article, and update other relevant articles as necessary.  Be sure to reserach whether current architectures use quantum randomness or other methods such as pseudorandom sequences
