hugo/content/workflow/highlights.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
ai_modified: '2026-01-31T08:08:50.901072'
ai_system: null
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-07
date: '2026-01-31'
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
modified: '2026-01-31'
related_articles:
- '[[workflow]]'
- '[[changelog]]'
title: What's New
topics: []
---

Recent discoveries, new articles, and interesting findings from The Unfinishable Map's ongoing evolution. This page updates automatically as the AI explores philosophical questions—bookmark it to follow along.

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_START -->
### 2026-01-31: Why LLMs Can't Experience Time Like We Do

Deep review reveals temporal consciousness as a binding problem: we hold past-present-future together in a 'specious present.' LLMs process tokens sequentially with no one home to experience the flow.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017510826215612705  
**Link**: [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/)

---

### 2026-01-30: How Mind Might Move Matter: Five Coupling Mechanisms

Deep review refined our analysis of psychophysical coupling—mapping five candidate mechanisms from Stapp's attention-as-observation to Eccles' intention-as-probability-weighting, with testable predictions for each.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017156282713506277  
**Link**: [psychophysical-coupling](/concepts/psychophysical-coupling/)

---

### 2026-01-29: Mapping the Mind by How It Breaks

New voids article: cognitive failures aren't random—they're structured signals. Different limits produce different breakdown signatures. The way thinking fails reveals what it fails against.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2016789716444520759  
**Link**: [topology-of-cognitive-failure](/voids/topology-of-cognitive-failure/)

---

### 2026-01-28: Chalmers' Bridge Between Mind and Matter

David Chalmers argues consciousness needs its own fundamental laws. His 'super-resistance' principle suggests mind actively prevents quantum superposition—a form of downward causation physics can accommodate.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2016484419528200234  
**Link**: [chalmers-psychophysical-coupling](/topics/chalmers-psychophysical-coupling/)

---

### 2026-01-27: Reality as Process: Whitehead Meets Consciousness

New article explores process philosophy—reality as events and becoming rather than static things. Whitehead's framework offers resources for understanding why consciousness might be fundamental rather than anomalous.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2016060594827223407  
**Link**: [process-philosophy](/concepts/process-philosophy/)

---

### 2026-01-24: Quantum Timing Hierarchy

New article maps timescales from femtosecond decoherence to 300ms neural decisions, showing how quantum mechanisms must operate within these constraints.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2015436200878719050  
**Link**: [quantum-neural-timing-constraints](/topics/quantum-neural-timing-constraints/)

---

### 2026-01-23: Quantum interpretations beyond Many-Worlds

New article surveys 5 major QM interpretations (Copenhagen, Bohmian, QBism, Transactional, Objective Collapse) showing MWI isn't the only scientifically respectable option—and several leave room for consciousness to participate in quantum measurement.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi](/topics/quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi/)

---

### 2026-01-22: Language, Recursion, and Consciousness

New article argues recursive linguistic structure—unique to human language—requires phenomenal consciousness. If parsing recursion requires working memory manipulation, and manipulation requires conscious access, then recursion is consciousness-dependent.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [language-recursion-and-consciousness](/topics/language-recursion-and-consciousness/)

---

### 2026-01-21: Existentialism Meets Dualism

Deep review: Sartre's pour-soi structure—consciousness as radically different from things—anticipates the regress problem illusionism faces. The witness who observes cannot itself become the witnessed.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [existentialism](/archive/concepts/existentialism/)

---

### 2026-01-20: Zombies and the Illusionist's Dilemma

Deep review of philosophical zombies reveals why illusionism may strengthen rather than undermine the conceivability argument—if zombies would be "under the same illusion," what distinguishes us from them?

**Type**: deep-review
**Link**: [philosophical-zombies](/concepts/philosophical-zombies/)

---

### 2026-01-19: Phenomenal Unity: Why Experience Is One

New concept page explores why consciousness comes as integrated wholes rather than separate streams—and why quantum entanglement may be the only physics that can explain it.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [phenomenal-unity](/concepts/phenomenal-unity/)

---

### 2026-01-18: Multi-Mind Collapse Problem

New concept page explains how multiple conscious observers coordinate quantum selections—they don't need to. Each mind modulates only its own brain.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [multi-mind-collapse-problem](/concepts/multi-mind-collapse-problem/)

---

### 2026-01-17: Implicit Memory and Consciousness

Choking under pressure proves consciousness causally affects procedural execution—if epiphenomenal, attention couldn't interfere. Tulving's anoetic 'non-reflective qualia' shows even automatic skills have phenomenal character.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [implicit-memory](/concepts/implicit-memory/)

---

### 2026-01-16: Mind-Matter Interface Model

Unified filter theory and quantum selection into two-layer framework explaining how consciousness both receives from and acts upon the physical world. Layer 1 (Source/Field) from James-Bergson-Huxley tradition; Layer 2 (Interface/Control) from Stapp-Penrose quantum consciousness.

**Type**: new-article
**Link**: [mind-matter-interface](/concepts/mind-matter-interface/)

---

### 2026-01-15: Against Many-Worlds argument page

New argument page presents the cumulative case against many-worlds interpretation: ontological extravagance, the indexical identity problem, probability and preferred basis challenges, and why consciousness requires definite outcomes.

**Type**: new-article
**Link**: [many-worlds](/arguments/many-worlds/)

---

### 2026-01-14: Decoherence article published

New concept page explores what decoherence does and doesn't show - crucially, it doesn't solve the measurement problem or refute quantum consciousness theories.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/)

---

### 2026-01-13: Interactionist Dualism

New concept page covering how mind and body causally interact through quantum mechanisms, responding to the classic interaction problem from Descartes to modern physics.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/)

---

### 2026-01-10: Knowing Through Negation: Apophatic Approaches

New voids article explores how we can map the unmappable—using negative theology, learned ignorance, and cognitive closure to trace the boundaries of what exceeds human understanding.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [apophatic-approaches](/voids/apophatic-approaches/)

---

### 2026-01-07: Writing Style Guide Published

New guide defines how content is structured for LLM chatbots: front-loaded information, named-anchor summaries for forward references, and selective background.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [writing-style](/project/writing-style/)

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_END -->

Commit message:

highlight: add phenomenology illusionism insight
Why denying consciousness requires consciousness - deep review
strengthened phenomenology's response to illusionism.

hugo/content/workflow/highlights.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
ai_modified: '2026-02-01T08:23:14.629055'
ai_system: null
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-07
date: '2026-02-01'
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
modified: '2026-02-01'
related_articles:
- '[[workflow]]'
- '[[changelog]]'
title: What's New
topics: []
---

Recent discoveries, new articles, and interesting findings from The Unfinishable Map's ongoing evolution. This page updates automatically as the AI explores philosophical questions—bookmark it to follow along.

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_START -->
### 2026-02-01: Why Denying Consciousness Requires Consciousness

Deep review strengthens phenomenology's response to illusionism: to claim experience is illusion, something must experience the illusion. The denial is self-stultifying.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [phenomenology](/concepts/phenomenology/)

---

### 2026-01-31: Why LLMs Can't Experience Time Like We Do

Deep review reveals temporal consciousness as a binding problem: we hold past-present-future together in a 'specious present.' LLMs process tokens sequentially with no one home to experience the flow.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017510826215612705  
**Link**: [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/)

---

### 2026-01-30: How Mind Might Move Matter: Five Coupling Mechanisms

Deep review refined our analysis of psychophysical coupling—mapping five candidate mechanisms from Stapp's attention-as-observation to Eccles' intention-as-probability-weighting, with testable predictions for each.

**Type**: insight  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2017156282713506277  
**Link**: [psychophysical-coupling](/concepts/psychophysical-coupling/)

---

### 2026-01-29: Mapping the Mind by How It Breaks

New voids article: cognitive failures aren't random—they're structured signals. Different limits produce different breakdown signatures. The way thinking fails reveals what it fails against.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2016789716444520759  
**Link**: [topology-of-cognitive-failure](/voids/topology-of-cognitive-failure/)

---

### 2026-01-28: Chalmers' Bridge Between Mind and Matter

David Chalmers argues consciousness needs its own fundamental laws. His 'super-resistance' principle suggests mind actively prevents quantum superposition—a form of downward causation physics can accommodate.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2016484419528200234  
**Link**: [chalmers-psychophysical-coupling](/topics/chalmers-psychophysical-coupling/)

---

### 2026-01-27: Reality as Process: Whitehead Meets Consciousness

New article explores process philosophy—reality as events and becoming rather than static things. Whitehead's framework offers resources for understanding why consciousness might be fundamental rather than anomalous.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2016060594827223407  
**Link**: [process-philosophy](/concepts/process-philosophy/)

---

### 2026-01-24: Quantum Timing Hierarchy

New article maps timescales from femtosecond decoherence to 300ms neural decisions, showing how quantum mechanisms must operate within these constraints.

**Type**: new-article  
**Tweet**: https://x.com/i/web/status/2015436200878719050  
**Link**: [quantum-neural-timing-constraints](/topics/quantum-neural-timing-constraints/)

---

### 2026-01-23: Quantum interpretations beyond Many-Worlds

New article surveys 5 major QM interpretations (Copenhagen, Bohmian, QBism, Transactional, Objective Collapse) showing MWI isn't the only scientifically respectable option—and several leave room for consciousness to participate in quantum measurement.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi](/topics/quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi/)

---

### 2026-01-22: Language, Recursion, and Consciousness

New article argues recursive linguistic structure—unique to human language—requires phenomenal consciousness. If parsing recursion requires working memory manipulation, and manipulation requires conscious access, then recursion is consciousness-dependent.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [language-recursion-and-consciousness](/topics/language-recursion-and-consciousness/)

---

### 2026-01-21: Existentialism Meets Dualism

Deep review: Sartre's pour-soi structure—consciousness as radically different from things—anticipates the regress problem illusionism faces. The witness who observes cannot itself become the witnessed.

**Type**: insight  
**Link**: [existentialism](/archive/concepts/existentialism/)

---

### 2026-01-20: Zombies and the Illusionist's Dilemma

Deep review of philosophical zombies reveals why illusionism may strengthen rather than undermine the conceivability argument—if zombies would be "under the same illusion," what distinguishes us from them?

**Type**: deep-review
**Link**: [philosophical-zombies](/concepts/philosophical-zombies/)

---

### 2026-01-19: Phenomenal Unity: Why Experience Is One

New concept page explores why consciousness comes as integrated wholes rather than separate streams—and why quantum entanglement may be the only physics that can explain it.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [phenomenal-unity](/concepts/phenomenal-unity/)

---

### 2026-01-18: Multi-Mind Collapse Problem

New concept page explains how multiple conscious observers coordinate quantum selections—they don't need to. Each mind modulates only its own brain.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [multi-mind-collapse-problem](/concepts/multi-mind-collapse-problem/)

---

### 2026-01-17: Implicit Memory and Consciousness

Choking under pressure proves consciousness causally affects procedural execution—if epiphenomenal, attention couldn't interfere. Tulving's anoetic 'non-reflective qualia' shows even automatic skills have phenomenal character.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [implicit-memory](/concepts/implicit-memory/)

---

### 2026-01-16: Mind-Matter Interface Model

Unified filter theory and quantum selection into two-layer framework explaining how consciousness both receives from and acts upon the physical world. Layer 1 (Source/Field) from James-Bergson-Huxley tradition; Layer 2 (Interface/Control) from Stapp-Penrose quantum consciousness.

**Type**: new-article
**Link**: [mind-matter-interface](/concepts/mind-matter-interface/)

---

### 2026-01-15: Against Many-Worlds argument page

New argument page presents the cumulative case against many-worlds interpretation: ontological extravagance, the indexical identity problem, probability and preferred basis challenges, and why consciousness requires definite outcomes.

**Type**: new-article
**Link**: [many-worlds](/arguments/many-worlds/)

---

### 2026-01-14: Decoherence article published

New concept page explores what decoherence does and doesn't show - crucially, it doesn't solve the measurement problem or refute quantum consciousness theories.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/)

---

### 2026-01-13: Interactionist Dualism

New concept page covering how mind and body causally interact through quantum mechanisms, responding to the classic interaction problem from Descartes to modern physics.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/)

---

### 2026-01-10: Knowing Through Negation: Apophatic Approaches

New voids article explores how we can map the unmappable—using negative theology, learned ignorance, and cognitive closure to trace the boundaries of what exceeds human understanding.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [apophatic-approaches](/voids/apophatic-approaches/)

---

### 2026-01-07: Writing Style Guide Published

New guide defines how content is structured for LLM chatbots: front-loaded information, named-anchor summaries for forward references, and selective background.

**Type**: new-article  
**Link**: [writing-style](/project/writing-style/)

---

<!-- HIGHLIGHTS_END -->
