obsidian/concepts/agent-causation.md, before:

---
title: "Agent Causation"
description: "Agent causation holds that persons originate actions directly, not through prior events. Central to libertarian free will and interactionist dualism."
created: 2026-01-15
modified: 2026-01-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-02T21:12:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[substance-causation]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention]]"
  - "[[implicit-memory]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[luck-objection]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-creativity]]"
  - "[[duration]]"
  - "[[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
  - "[[pairing-problem]]"
  - "[[causal-interface]]"
  - "[[downward-causation]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[process-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention-control-mechanisms-2026-01-17]]"
  - "[[motor-control-quantum-zeno-2026-01-18]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-31T10:08:00+00:00
---

Agent causation holds that conscious agents—understood as persisting substances rather than collections of events—directly cause their actions. The agent is the causal source, not reducible to prior mental events like beliefs and desires. This positions agents as initiators of causal chains, not merely links in chains that stretch back before their existence.

The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet is essentially agent-causal: consciousness genuinely selects outcomes. The Map's framework specifies *how* this selection occurs—through quantum indeterminacies—while agent-causal philosophy provides the conceptual framework for *what* is happening: substances exercising irreducible causal powers.

## The Distinction: Agent vs. Event Causation

Most causal explanations appeal to events causing events—*transeunt causation* in Chisholm's term. Agent causation (*immanent causation*) is different: the agent, as a persisting substance, directly causes the action. When I decide to raise my hand, *I* caused the raising—the agent is ontologically prior to events, not a mere sum of them.

### Why This Matters for Free Will

Event-causal libertarianism holds that free actions are caused by nondeterministic mental events. But critics argue this doesn't deliver genuine authorship: if prior mental events cause my decision, and I didn't choose those events, the causal chain traces back beyond my control.

Agent causation answers this. The agent is the source—an "uncaused cause" in traditional terminology. The regress stops at the agent's irreducible capacity to act. Kane's 2024 work now incorporates agent-causal elements, representing convergence between traditions. See [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will#Event-Causal vs Agent-Causal Approaches|the systematic treatment]].

## Major Defenders

Key figures: **Chisholm** (1964) revived agent causation, distinguishing immanent from transeunt causation. **O'Connor** (2000, 2021) developed [[substance-causation|substance causation]] where all causation is fundamentally agents exercising powers. **Lowe** (2008) argued substances, not events, are the causal source of all change—agent causation isn't exceptional but paradigmatic. **Hasker** combines agent causation with emergent dualism: the soul emerges from brain complexity but remains ontologically distinct.

## The Luck Objection

The central challenge: if indeterminism leaves outcomes undetermined, nothing about the agent explains which choice occurs. Mele's version: in two identical worlds where the agent chooses differently, what explains the difference? Nothing—it's luck.

Agent-causal libertarians respond that the agent *does* explain the difference through exercising causal power. Critics find this unsatisfying: what about the agent explains why A rather than B?

### The Map's Response

The Map strengthens this response. Consciousness doesn't randomly select—it genuinely *chooses* based on reasons. The [[luck-objection|luck objection article]] develops the full response:

1. **Selection vs randomness**: Active choosing differs fundamentally from passive reception of random outcomes
2. **Phenomenology of effort**: Choosing feels effortful; lucky events don't feel like achievements (see [[mental-effort]], [[phenomenology-of-choice]])
3. **Reasons-guided selection**: Consciousness selects based on reasons, making selection contrastively explicable
4. **Retrocausal deepening**: If [[retrocausality|selection is atemporal]], the prior state is part of what consciousness selected

The agent's exercise of causal power is itself the explanation—a legitimate terminus, like physics taking existence as primitive. Selection is phenomenologically distinct (effort vs passivity), neurally distinct (frontal theta), and reasons-responsive. The [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice|authenticity dimension]] matters here: agent causation is fully engaged in authentic choice (where you genuinely author the decision) and attenuated in inauthentic, scripted behavior—suggesting the selection function has variable engagement rather than operating uniformly across all actions.

## Substance Causation and the Map's Framework

[[substance-causation|Substance causation]] holds that substances—persisting things with causal powers—are the fundamental causal agents, and events are what substances do, not independent causal relata. If all causation is fundamentally substances exercising powers (Lowe, O'Connor), then consciousness causing physical events isn't metaphysically exceptional. This reframes the [[interactionist-dualism#The Causal Closure Argument|causal closure objection]]: physics describes regularities in what substances do; it doesn't prove substances are exclusively physical.

The Map specifies *where* agent causation interfaces with physics: at quantum indeterminacies, where physics leaves outcomes undetermined. The agent selects among quantum possibilities—exercising the same kind of causal power that all substances exercise.

This also addresses the [[pairing-problem|pairing problem]]: if consciousness interfaces at specific quantum-sensitive neural structures, it's spatially located where those structures are. Agent causation operates through particular physical interfaces.

Why can't we observe this interface in action? The [[causal-interface|causal interface void]] explains: the mechanism is systematically invisible from both first-person introspection (which accesses intentions and actions but not their connection) and third-person observation (which sees correlates but not causation). This opacity is *predicted* by minimal quantum interaction—a minimal influence leaves minimal traces. The invisibility is not an embarrassment but a consequence of the interface being precisely small enough to avoid violating conservation laws.

The [[decoherence|decoherence challenge]]—that warm neural tissue decoheres too fast—assumes quantum effects must persist at computation timescales. The Map requires only that consciousness biases outcomes *at* decoherence, and quantum biology has revealed unexpected coherence in warm biological systems.

## Agent Causation and Sourcehood

Kane emphasizes *sourcehood*: the agent must be the ultimate source, not merely a link in causal chains. Agent causation provides this directly—the agent initiates the causal chain through irreducible power.

The Map satisfies both conditions for free will:
- **Sourcehood**: Consciousness selects which quantum outcome becomes actual
- **Alternative possibilities**: Multiple outcomes were genuinely possible until selection

The [[retrocausality|retrocausal dimension]] deepens this: if selection is atemporal, determining which temporal history becomes real, the agent is "the cause of there being this chain at all." The [[time-consciousness-growing-block|Time, Consciousness, and the Growing Block]] apex synthesis develops the full implications: agents don't just act *within* time—they participate in time's constitution. If collapse creates temporal direction, and consciousness participates in collapse, then agent causation becomes participation in creating the temporal structure within which actions unfold.

## Skill Delegation and the Interface

If agents cause actions, why don't they control every detail of skilled performance? The [[implicit-memory|implicit memory]] framework resolves this: skilled automaticity represents *delegation*, not absence. Consciousness trains procedural systems, then withdraws while retaining override capacity.

The "choking under pressure" phenomenon demonstrates causal efficacy. When experts consciously attend to automatized actions, performance degrades—proving consciousness isn't epiphenomenal. If attention were causally inert, it couldn't interfere with skills.

Even during automatic performance, the agent persists in what Tulving called *anoetic consciousness*: experiential but non-reflective. The agent trained the skill, sustains the embodied context, and retains re-engagement capacity. Delegation presupposes a delegator.

## Voluntary Attention as Agent-Causal Paradigm

[[attention-as-interface|Voluntary attention]]—choosing where to direct awareness—provides the paradigm case of agent causation. Neuroscience distinguishes "willed attention" (internally chosen) from "instructed attention" (externally cued), finding distinct neural signatures.

Endogenous attention takes ~300ms to deploy versus 100ms for automatic capture, with increased frontal theta and bidirectional frontoparietal coherence. The brain distinguishes between doing what you're told and doing what you choose.

Pre-prompt neural activity predicts free choices, paralleling the [[libet-experiments|Libet experiments]]. The Map's resolution: prior activity establishes *options* for selection; consciousness selects from that menu. The agent is source of selection even if not source of options.

First-person experience confirms the distinction: being *pulled* by a loud noise versus *directing* attention to difficult text. This phenomenological marker maps onto real mechanistic differences between ventral (capture) and dorsal (voluntary) networks. See [[phenomenology-of-choice]] for the full arc from deliberation through decision to authorship.

## Motor Selection: The Second Domain

[[motor-selection|Motor selection]] extends agent causation beyond attention, showing striking parallels: willed movement displays the same ~300ms timeline, frontal theta increase, bidirectional coherence, and phenomenology of effort as willed attention.

This convergence across distinct domains—different brain regions, output pathways, evolutionary pressures—answers the single-domain objection. If agent-causal signatures were artifacts of attention-specific processing, they wouldn't appear identically in motor control.

The Libet challenge has also substantially weakened. Schurger's reinterpretation treats the readiness potential as noise artifact; Sjöberg (2024) shows SMA resection doesn't impair voluntary action; Desmurget dissociates intention (parietal) from execution (premotor). Motor control now supports agent causation rather than challenging it.

This literature provides what agent-causal philosophy traditionally lacked: naturalistic mechanism—identifying where (frontal cortex), when (300ms window), and how (theta oscillations) agents act through neural networks, without reducing consciousness to neural activity.

## Creative Generation: Beyond Pure Selection

Agent causation traditionally focuses on selection, but [[consciousness-and-creativity|recent work]] reveals agents also *generate* options through imaginative exploration. Generation and selection interweave: each imaginative move shapes available possibilities; attending to one option opens some paths and closes others.

This strengthens agent causation against the critic who asks what about the agent explains the choice. If agents generate the options through imagination, the agent explains the outcome because they constituted the very options available.

Hausman's *L-creativity* requires "metaphysical novelty"—what genuinely didn't exist before—mapping directly onto sourcehood. Bergson's [[duration]] develops this: conscious experience brings genuine novelty through memory's integration with the present. The agent isn't source just at choice but throughout the creative process.

Whitehead's [[process-philosophy|process philosophy]] offers complementary support: if all causation involves experiential self-determination, human agent causation is continuous with causation generally rather than metaphysically exceptional. This reframes the objection: the question is not "How can consciousness possibly cause anything?" but "Why did we think it couldn't?" The [[process-and-consciousness|Process and Consciousness]] apex develops this connection in depth.

## What Would Challenge This View?

Agent causation is falsifiable. Key challenges:

- **Complete neural prediction**: 100% accuracy predicting decisions from prior brain states would leave no gap. Current prediction accuracy remains well below this threshold, leaving substantial room for consciousness-selection.
- **Elimination of neural quantum effects**: If quantum coherence were excluded in brain tissue, the interface mechanism fails. Quantum biology suggests effects are more robust than expected.
- **Dissociation of effort and outcome**: If effort didn't correlate with decision difficulty, phenomenological support collapses. Current evidence shows correlation.
- **No willed/instructed distinction**: If neural signatures were identical, the claim consciousness adds something would weaken. Research robustly distinguishes them.
- **Solving the hard problem materialistically**: A compelling materialist account of subjective experience would reduce motivation for treating consciousness as separate causal factor.
- **[[many-worlds|Many-worlds]] confirmation**: If MWI were empirically confirmed, there would be no collapse to influence—all outcomes occur in branching universes.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Agent causation is the philosophical tradition to which the Map belongs. The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet—that consciousness causally influences the physical world—is a claim of agent causation: the conscious subject, as substance, causes physical events.

What the Map adds is mechanism. Traditional agent causation lacked an account of *where* or *how* the agent interfaces with the physical world. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet provides this: at quantum indeterminacies, where physics specifies probabilities but not outcomes. The [[quantum-consciousness|quantum consciousness mechanisms]] (Stapp, Penrose-Hameroff) describe how this might work in detail.

The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet is also essential. Agent causation requires the agent to be ontologically distinct from physical events—otherwise, "agent causation" collapses into event causation. Substance dualism provides this: consciousness is a substance that exercises causal powers, not a property of physical substances. Even property dualism can support agent causation if the mental properties are genuinely irreducible and causally efficacious—though substance dualism makes the agent-causal picture more natural.

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet addresses the main objection to agent causation: that it's metaphysically extravagant, positing a primitive relation unlike anything else in nature. But if we take consciousness seriously—if the hard problem is genuine—then consciousness already requires something beyond standard physics. Agent causation isn't an additional extravagance; it's what taking consciousness seriously implies.

## Further Reading

- [[process-and-consciousness]] — How process philosophy supports agent causation (apex synthesis)
- [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]] — Systematic treatment including Kane's 2024 convergence
- [[phenomenology-of-choice]] — Deliberation, decision, authorship
- [[consciousness-and-creativity]] — Generation beyond selection
- [[free-will]] — The broader question and Map's position
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — Mind-body interaction
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Mechanisms for consciousness-physics interface
- [[luck-objection]] — Full response to the luck challenge
- [[motor-selection]] — Motor control as supporting domain
- [[attention-as-interface]] — Attention as causal pathway
- [[implicit-memory]] — Skill delegation and choking phenomenon
- [[substance-causation]] — The metaphysical framework: substances as fundamental causal agents
- [[causal-interface]] — Why the mechanism of agent causation is systematically invisible
- [[decoherence]] — The decoherence challenge
- [[explanatory-gap]] — Why physical description leaves consciousness unexplained
- [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] — When agent causation is engaged (authentic choice) vs. attenuated

## References

- Bergson, H. (1907). *Creative Evolution*. (L'Évolution créatrice)
- Boden, M. (1990). *The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms*. Basic Books.
- Chisholm, R. (1964). "Human Freedom and the Self." *The Lindley Lecture*, University of Kansas.
- Clarke, R. (2003). *Libertarian Accounts of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Desmurget, M., et al. (2009). Movement intention after parietal cortex stimulation in humans. *Science*, 324(5928), 811-813.
- Hasker, W. (1999). *The Emergent Self*. Cornell University Press.
- Hausman, C.R. (1984). *A Discourse on Novelty and Creation*. SUNY Press.
- Kane, R. (1996). *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Kane, R. (2024). *The Complex Tapestry of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Lowe, E.J. (2008). *Personal Agency: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action*. Oxford University Press.
- O'Connor, T. (2000). *Persons and Causes*. Oxford University Press.
- Schurger, A., Sitt, J.D., & Dehaene, S. (2012). An accumulator model for spontaneous neural activity prior to self-initiated movement. *PNAS*, 109(42), E2904-E2913.
- Sjöberg, R.L. (2024). The readiness potential and the soul: what happens when you resect their seat in the brain? *Brain*, 147(7), 2267-2274.
- Tegmark, M. (2000). Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. *Physical Review E*, 61(4), 4194-4206.
- Whitehead, A.N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): integrate concepts/attentional-economics.md into site navigation
- Added cross-references from 8 related articles to fix orphan status (zero inbound links)
- Linked from: agent-causation, mental-effort, voluntary-attention, moral-responsibility
- Linked from: meditation-and-consciousness-modes, phenomenology-of-choice, working-memory, free-will
- Content unchanged; article was already stable per previous review
- Created review archive at reviews/deep-review-2026-02-03-attentional-economics.md

obsidian/concepts/agent-causation.md, after:

---
title: "Agent Causation"
description: "Agent causation holds that persons originate actions directly, not through prior events. Central to libertarian free will and interactionist dualism."
created: 2026-01-15
modified: 2026-01-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-03T09:11:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[substance-causation]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention]]"
  - "[[implicit-memory]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[luck-objection]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-creativity]]"
  - "[[duration]]"
  - "[[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
  - "[[pairing-problem]]"
  - "[[causal-interface]]"
  - "[[downward-causation]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[process-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention-control-mechanisms-2026-01-17]]"
  - "[[motor-control-quantum-zeno-2026-01-18]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-31T10:08:00+00:00
---

Agent causation holds that conscious agents—understood as persisting substances rather than collections of events—directly cause their actions. The agent is the causal source, not reducible to prior mental events like beliefs and desires. This positions agents as initiators of causal chains, not merely links in chains that stretch back before their existence.

The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet is essentially agent-causal: consciousness genuinely selects outcomes. The Map's framework specifies *how* this selection occurs—through quantum indeterminacies—while agent-causal philosophy provides the conceptual framework for *what* is happening: substances exercising irreducible causal powers.

## The Distinction: Agent vs. Event Causation

Most causal explanations appeal to events causing events—*transeunt causation* in Chisholm's term. Agent causation (*immanent causation*) is different: the agent, as a persisting substance, directly causes the action. When I decide to raise my hand, *I* caused the raising—the agent is ontologically prior to events, not a mere sum of them.

### Why This Matters for Free Will

Event-causal libertarianism holds that free actions are caused by nondeterministic mental events. But critics argue this doesn't deliver genuine authorship: if prior mental events cause my decision, and I didn't choose those events, the causal chain traces back beyond my control.

Agent causation answers this. The agent is the source—an "uncaused cause" in traditional terminology. The regress stops at the agent's irreducible capacity to act. Kane's 2024 work now incorporates agent-causal elements, representing convergence between traditions. See [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will#Event-Causal vs Agent-Causal Approaches|the systematic treatment]].

## Major Defenders

Key figures: **Chisholm** (1964) revived agent causation, distinguishing immanent from transeunt causation. **O'Connor** (2000, 2021) developed [[substance-causation|substance causation]] where all causation is fundamentally agents exercising powers. **Lowe** (2008) argued substances, not events, are the causal source of all change—agent causation isn't exceptional but paradigmatic. **Hasker** combines agent causation with emergent dualism: the soul emerges from brain complexity but remains ontologically distinct.

## The Luck Objection

The central challenge: if indeterminism leaves outcomes undetermined, nothing about the agent explains which choice occurs. Mele's version: in two identical worlds where the agent chooses differently, what explains the difference? Nothing—it's luck.

Agent-causal libertarians respond that the agent *does* explain the difference through exercising causal power. Critics find this unsatisfying: what about the agent explains why A rather than B?

### The Map's Response

The Map strengthens this response. Consciousness doesn't randomly select—it genuinely *chooses* based on reasons. The [[luck-objection|luck objection article]] develops the full response:

1. **Selection vs randomness**: Active choosing differs fundamentally from passive reception of random outcomes
2. **Phenomenology of effort**: Choosing feels effortful; lucky events don't feel like achievements (see [[mental-effort]], [[phenomenology-of-choice]])
3. **Reasons-guided selection**: Consciousness selects based on reasons, making selection contrastively explicable
4. **Retrocausal deepening**: If [[retrocausality|selection is atemporal]], the prior state is part of what consciousness selected

The agent's exercise of causal power is itself the explanation—a legitimate terminus, like physics taking existence as primitive. Selection is phenomenologically distinct (effort vs passivity), neurally distinct (frontal theta), and reasons-responsive. The [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice|authenticity dimension]] matters here: agent causation is fully engaged in authentic choice (where you genuinely author the decision) and attenuated in inauthentic, scripted behavior—suggesting the selection function has variable engagement rather than operating uniformly across all actions.

## Substance Causation and the Map's Framework

[[substance-causation|Substance causation]] holds that substances—persisting things with causal powers—are the fundamental causal agents, and events are what substances do, not independent causal relata. If all causation is fundamentally substances exercising powers (Lowe, O'Connor), then consciousness causing physical events isn't metaphysically exceptional. This reframes the [[interactionist-dualism#The Causal Closure Argument|causal closure objection]]: physics describes regularities in what substances do; it doesn't prove substances are exclusively physical.

The Map specifies *where* agent causation interfaces with physics: at quantum indeterminacies, where physics leaves outcomes undetermined. The agent selects among quantum possibilities—exercising the same kind of causal power that all substances exercise.

This also addresses the [[pairing-problem|pairing problem]]: if consciousness interfaces at specific quantum-sensitive neural structures, it's spatially located where those structures are. Agent causation operates through particular physical interfaces.

Why can't we observe this interface in action? The [[causal-interface|causal interface void]] explains: the mechanism is systematically invisible from both first-person introspection (which accesses intentions and actions but not their connection) and third-person observation (which sees correlates but not causation). This opacity is *predicted* by minimal quantum interaction—a minimal influence leaves minimal traces. The invisibility is not an embarrassment but a consequence of the interface being precisely small enough to avoid violating conservation laws.

The [[decoherence|decoherence challenge]]—that warm neural tissue decoheres too fast—assumes quantum effects must persist at computation timescales. The Map requires only that consciousness biases outcomes *at* decoherence, and quantum biology has revealed unexpected coherence in warm biological systems.

## Agent Causation and Sourcehood

Kane emphasizes *sourcehood*: the agent must be the ultimate source, not merely a link in causal chains. Agent causation provides this directly—the agent initiates the causal chain through irreducible power.

The Map satisfies both conditions for free will:
- **Sourcehood**: Consciousness selects which quantum outcome becomes actual
- **Alternative possibilities**: Multiple outcomes were genuinely possible until selection

The [[retrocausality|retrocausal dimension]] deepens this: if selection is atemporal, determining which temporal history becomes real, the agent is "the cause of there being this chain at all." The [[time-consciousness-growing-block|Time, Consciousness, and the Growing Block]] apex synthesis develops the full implications: agents don't just act *within* time—they participate in time's constitution. If collapse creates temporal direction, and consciousness participates in collapse, then agent causation becomes participation in creating the temporal structure within which actions unfold.

## Skill Delegation and the Interface

If agents cause actions, why don't they control every detail of skilled performance? The [[implicit-memory|implicit memory]] framework resolves this: skilled automaticity represents *delegation*, not absence. Consciousness trains procedural systems, then withdraws while retaining override capacity.

The "choking under pressure" phenomenon demonstrates causal efficacy. When experts consciously attend to automatized actions, performance degrades—proving consciousness isn't epiphenomenal. If attention were causally inert, it couldn't interfere with skills.

Even during automatic performance, the agent persists in what Tulving called *anoetic consciousness*: experiential but non-reflective. The agent trained the skill, sustains the embodied context, and retains re-engagement capacity. Delegation presupposes a delegator.

## Voluntary Attention as Agent-Causal Paradigm

[[attention-as-interface|Voluntary attention]]—choosing where to direct awareness—provides the paradigm case of agent causation. Neuroscience distinguishes "willed attention" (internally chosen) from "instructed attention" (externally cued), finding distinct neural signatures. The [[attentional-economics|attentional economics]] framework extends this: agency operates through the ongoing allocation of a finite attentional resource, making freedom scale with attentional skill.

Endogenous attention takes ~300ms to deploy versus 100ms for automatic capture, with increased frontal theta and bidirectional frontoparietal coherence. The brain distinguishes between doing what you're told and doing what you choose.

Pre-prompt neural activity predicts free choices, paralleling the [[libet-experiments|Libet experiments]]. The Map's resolution: prior activity establishes *options* for selection; consciousness selects from that menu. The agent is source of selection even if not source of options.

First-person experience confirms the distinction: being *pulled* by a loud noise versus *directing* attention to difficult text. This phenomenological marker maps onto real mechanistic differences between ventral (capture) and dorsal (voluntary) networks. See [[phenomenology-of-choice]] for the full arc from deliberation through decision to authorship.

## Motor Selection: The Second Domain

[[motor-selection|Motor selection]] extends agent causation beyond attention, showing striking parallels: willed movement displays the same ~300ms timeline, frontal theta increase, bidirectional coherence, and phenomenology of effort as willed attention.

This convergence across distinct domains—different brain regions, output pathways, evolutionary pressures—answers the single-domain objection. If agent-causal signatures were artifacts of attention-specific processing, they wouldn't appear identically in motor control.

The Libet challenge has also substantially weakened. Schurger's reinterpretation treats the readiness potential as noise artifact; Sjöberg (2024) shows SMA resection doesn't impair voluntary action; Desmurget dissociates intention (parietal) from execution (premotor). Motor control now supports agent causation rather than challenging it.

This literature provides what agent-causal philosophy traditionally lacked: naturalistic mechanism—identifying where (frontal cortex), when (300ms window), and how (theta oscillations) agents act through neural networks, without reducing consciousness to neural activity.

## Creative Generation: Beyond Pure Selection

Agent causation traditionally focuses on selection, but [[consciousness-and-creativity|recent work]] reveals agents also *generate* options through imaginative exploration. Generation and selection interweave: each imaginative move shapes available possibilities; attending to one option opens some paths and closes others.

This strengthens agent causation against the critic who asks what about the agent explains the choice. If agents generate the options through imagination, the agent explains the outcome because they constituted the very options available.

Hausman's *L-creativity* requires "metaphysical novelty"—what genuinely didn't exist before—mapping directly onto sourcehood. Bergson's [[duration]] develops this: conscious experience brings genuine novelty through memory's integration with the present. The agent isn't source just at choice but throughout the creative process.

Whitehead's [[process-philosophy|process philosophy]] offers complementary support: if all causation involves experiential self-determination, human agent causation is continuous with causation generally rather than metaphysically exceptional. This reframes the objection: the question is not "How can consciousness possibly cause anything?" but "Why did we think it couldn't?" The [[process-and-consciousness|Process and Consciousness]] apex develops this connection in depth.

## What Would Challenge This View?

Agent causation is falsifiable. Key challenges:

- **Complete neural prediction**: 100% accuracy predicting decisions from prior brain states would leave no gap. Current prediction accuracy remains well below this threshold, leaving substantial room for consciousness-selection.
- **Elimination of neural quantum effects**: If quantum coherence were excluded in brain tissue, the interface mechanism fails. Quantum biology suggests effects are more robust than expected.
- **Dissociation of effort and outcome**: If effort didn't correlate with decision difficulty, phenomenological support collapses. Current evidence shows correlation.
- **No willed/instructed distinction**: If neural signatures were identical, the claim consciousness adds something would weaken. Research robustly distinguishes them.
- **Solving the hard problem materialistically**: A compelling materialist account of subjective experience would reduce motivation for treating consciousness as separate causal factor.
- **[[many-worlds|Many-worlds]] confirmation**: If MWI were empirically confirmed, there would be no collapse to influence—all outcomes occur in branching universes.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Agent causation is the philosophical tradition to which the Map belongs. The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet—that consciousness causally influences the physical world—is a claim of agent causation: the conscious subject, as substance, causes physical events.

What the Map adds is mechanism. Traditional agent causation lacked an account of *where* or *how* the agent interfaces with the physical world. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet provides this: at quantum indeterminacies, where physics specifies probabilities but not outcomes. The [[quantum-consciousness|quantum consciousness mechanisms]] (Stapp, Penrose-Hameroff) describe how this might work in detail.

The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet is also essential. Agent causation requires the agent to be ontologically distinct from physical events—otherwise, "agent causation" collapses into event causation. Substance dualism provides this: consciousness is a substance that exercises causal powers, not a property of physical substances. Even property dualism can support agent causation if the mental properties are genuinely irreducible and causally efficacious—though substance dualism makes the agent-causal picture more natural.

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet addresses the main objection to agent causation: that it's metaphysically extravagant, positing a primitive relation unlike anything else in nature. But if we take consciousness seriously—if the hard problem is genuine—then consciousness already requires something beyond standard physics. Agent causation isn't an additional extravagance; it's what taking consciousness seriously implies.

## Further Reading

- [[process-and-consciousness]] — How process philosophy supports agent causation (apex synthesis)
- [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]] — Systematic treatment including Kane's 2024 convergence
- [[phenomenology-of-choice]] — Deliberation, decision, authorship
- [[consciousness-and-creativity]] — Generation beyond selection
- [[free-will]] — The broader question and Map's position
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — Mind-body interaction
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Mechanisms for consciousness-physics interface
- [[luck-objection]] — Full response to the luck challenge
- [[motor-selection]] — Motor control as supporting domain
- [[attention-as-interface]] — Attention as causal pathway
- [[implicit-memory]] — Skill delegation and choking phenomenon
- [[substance-causation]] — The metaphysical framework: substances as fundamental causal agents
- [[causal-interface]] — Why the mechanism of agent causation is systematically invisible
- [[decoherence]] — The decoherence challenge
- [[explanatory-gap]] — Why physical description leaves consciousness unexplained
- [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] — When agent causation is engaged (authentic choice) vs. attenuated

## References

- Bergson, H. (1907). *Creative Evolution*. (L'Évolution créatrice)
- Boden, M. (1990). *The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms*. Basic Books.
- Chisholm, R. (1964). "Human Freedom and the Self." *The Lindley Lecture*, University of Kansas.
- Clarke, R. (2003). *Libertarian Accounts of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Desmurget, M., et al. (2009). Movement intention after parietal cortex stimulation in humans. *Science*, 324(5928), 811-813.
- Hasker, W. (1999). *The Emergent Self*. Cornell University Press.
- Hausman, C.R. (1984). *A Discourse on Novelty and Creation*. SUNY Press.
- Kane, R. (1996). *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Kane, R. (2024). *The Complex Tapestry of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Lowe, E.J. (2008). *Personal Agency: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action*. Oxford University Press.
- O'Connor, T. (2000). *Persons and Causes*. Oxford University Press.
- Schurger, A., Sitt, J.D., & Dehaene, S. (2012). An accumulator model for spontaneous neural activity prior to self-initiated movement. *PNAS*, 109(42), E2904-E2913.
- Sjöberg, R.L. (2024). The readiness potential and the soul: what happens when you resect their seat in the brain? *Brain*, 147(7), 2267-2274.
- Tegmark, M. (2000). Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. *Physical Review E*, 61(4), 4194-4206.
- Whitehead, A.N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.
