obsidian/concepts/altered-states-of-consciousness.md, before:

---
title: "Altered States of Consciousness"
description: "Altered states reveal consciousness's range through meditation, psychedelics, and sleep. They challenge reductive accounts and support dualist frameworks."
created: 2026-01-18
modified: 2026-01-19
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-26T22:20:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[loss-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[minimal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[filter-theory]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]]"
  - "[[dreams-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[sleep-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
  - "[[global-workspace-theory]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[eastern]]"
  - "[[neurophenomenology]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-18
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-26T11:49:09+00:00
coalesced_from:
  - "/topics/altered-states-consciousness/"
---

Altered states of consciousness (ASCs) constitute a diverse family of experiences—psychedelics, anesthesia, meditation, hypnosis, flow states, dreaming, near-death experiences—unified by [[qualia|qualitative]] deviation from baseline waking consciousness. For dualism, ASCs are particularly revealing: they demonstrate that consciousness operates in multiple modes with distinct phenomenal qualities, suggesting the brain-consciousness interface has configurable settings rather than being a simple on/off producer. The [[filter-theory|filter theory]] interprets each ASC as a different configuration of the filtering mechanism—some states *loosen* the filter (psychedelics, mystical experiences), others *narrow* it (anesthesia, sleep), still others *reconfigure* it (meditation, flow).

## Defining Altered States

Charles Tart's foundational definition (1969) identifies ASCs as "profound changes in the overall pattern of subjective experiences." This phenomenological approach avoids the question-begging implicit in some neuroscientific definitions that characterise ASCs as "increased tendency to produce misrepresentations." From The Unfinishable Map's perspective, some ASCs may involve *less filtered* access to reality rather than error.

Tart's taxonomy identifies ten dimensions along which consciousness can vary: sense of identity, body image, time perception, perception, cognition, memory, affect, sense of meaning, volition, and unconscious processing. ASCs shift multiple dimensions simultaneously—distinguishing them from ordinary variations in mood or attention. The 2025 thalamic nuclei research identified five specific thalamic nuclei orchestrating state transitions, with distinct connectivity patterns across anesthesia, sleep, and disorders of consciousness—neuroimaging confirmation that ASCs represent discrete modes rather than continuous variation.

Key dimensions of alteration include:

| Dimension | Baseline State | Examples of Alteration |
|-----------|----------------|------------------------|
| Self-boundary | Stable sense of self | Ego dissolution (psychedelics), absorption (flow) |
| Time perception | Linear flow | Time dilation/contraction, eternity experiences |
| Agency | Normal volition | Automaticity (flow), reduced agency (hypnosis) |
| Perceptual vividness | Standard intensity | Enhancement (psychedelics) or dampening (sedation) |
| Access to memory | Selective retrieval | Expanded (some psychedelic states) or restricted |

## The Filter Theory Interpretation

The materialist interprets brain-consciousness correlations during ASCs as evidence of production: different brain states *generate* different conscious states. The filter theory offers an alternative: different brain states *configure* the interface differently, allowing different aspects of consciousness to manifest.

Several findings support the filter interpretation:

**Expansion rather than distortion.** Psychedelics don't merely scramble perception—they often *expand* it. Users report insights, enhanced pattern recognition, and access to normally unconscious material. Aldous Huxley's "reducing valve" metaphor captures this: the brain normally constrains consciousness to action-relevant information; psychedelics loosen this constraint.

A materialist objection holds that these "insights" are illusory—confabulations that merely *feel* profound without genuine epistemic value. A deeper version notes that psychedelics disrupt the very neural processes required for accurate introspection—how can we trust reports from compromised metacognitive systems? The response: some psychedelic insights prove verifiable (therapeutic breakthroughs, creative solutions), and the expansion hypothesis predicts their *selectivity*—not random confabulation but access to genuinely suppressed information (childhood memories, repressed patterns). Pure confabulation would be random; genuine filter-loosening would be informative. Clinical studies of psilocybin-assisted therapy show lasting improvements in depression and anxiety that correlate with reported mystical-type experiences, suggesting the insights have functional validity beyond subjective impression.

**Identical outputs, divergent experiences.** Different anaesthetics (propofol vs. ketamine) can produce identical behavioural outputs—unresponsiveness, amnesia—while producing radically different conscious experiences. Ketamine preserves vivid experience despite behavioural unresponsiveness; propofol seems to eliminate experience entirely. Mashour et al. (2024) demonstrate this asymmetry neuroimaging: both agents suppress cortical activity, but through different thalamic pathways with different phenomenal consequences. If consciousness were simply produced by brain states, similar behavioural suppression should correlate with similar phenomenal suppression. The divergence suggests the brain *mediates* rather than *generates* experience.

**Information received but not perceived.** Mashour and Bharioke's 2024 *Neuron* review confirms that sensory information reaches the brain during light sedation but is not perceived—what they term "received but not perceived." The signal arrives; something prevents its manifestation in consciousness. This is precisely what filter theory predicts—disruption of interface rather than disruption of consciousness itself.

## Specific States and What They Reveal

### Psychedelics

The REBUS model (Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics) proposes that psychedelics relax high-level predictive constraints—the brain's expectations become less rigid, allowing bottom-up sensory information greater influence (Carhart-Harris & Friston, 2019).

Neuroimaging reveals a paradox: psychedelics *decrease* within-network connectivity (especially in the [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness#The Default Mode Network|default mode network]]) while *increasing* between-network connectivity. The brain becomes simultaneously less integrated locally and more integrated globally.

The Penrose-Hameroff Orch OR theory proposes a quantum mechanism: psychedelic molecules bind to microtubules and induce quantum coherence. If consciousness participates in quantum collapse (as the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet proposes), psychedelics might enhance this participation. This hypothesis remains speculative—quantum coherence in warm biological systems faces the [[decoherence]] objection that thermal noise should destroy superpositions almost instantly. However, 2024 evidence of macroscopic quantum entanglement signatures in living human brains (correlated with conscious states via MRI) suggests the decoherence problem may be less fatal than Tegmark calculated. The mechanism deserves continued investigation rather than dismissal.

### Flow States

Csikszentmihalyi's flow—the state of optimal experience during skilled activity—involves "transient hypofrontality": reduced activity in executive control regions (superior frontal gyri) despite enhanced performance. This seems paradoxical: how does reduced control produce better outcomes?

Filter theory resolves the paradox. Flow involves consciousness *releasing* active control, allowing highly trained circuits to operate with less interference. The filter narrows to exclude deliberative processing while remaining open to automatic expertise. This supports [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]—consciousness normally exerts control, and its deliberate release in flow demonstrates its active role in non-flow cognition.

### Hypnosis

Recent neuroimaging (2025) confirms that hypnosis alters executive control network integration, corresponding to altered subjective sense of agency. Highly hypnotisable individuals show increased anterior default mode network activity. The key insight: altered sense of agency maps directly to altered neural patterns, but the direction of causation remains open. From the Map's perspective, hypnotic suggestion may work by consciousness voluntarily reconfiguring its interface rather than brain states simply overriding consciousness.

### Meditation

Advanced meditation produces states ranging from focused absorption (samadhi) to [[witness-consciousness|witness awareness]] to cessation events—"radically altered states characterised by full loss of consciousness" that, unlike anaesthetic unconsciousness, are voluntary and transformative. Tantric yoga offers systematic phenomenology of consciousness structures that meditators navigate deliberately.

The voluntariness is crucial. Meditators deliberately alter their brain-consciousness interface through attention training. Longitudinal studies show meditation produces lasting structural brain changes. From the Map's framework, this provides evidence for [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]: consciousness can deliberately reconfigure its neural interface through sustained practice.

Cessation events illuminate filter theory directly. Unlike anesthesia (where consciousness appears eliminated) or sleep (where it continues in altered form), meditative cessation involves *deliberate* withdrawal of consciousness from neural processing—then return. The transformation reported by advanced practitioners upon return suggests consciousness operated during cessation in a mode unconstrained by the brain-interface, returning with insights unavailable during normal filtered operation.

### Near-Death Experiences

A 2024 University of Michigan study found gamma surges in dying patients—localised to the temporal-parietal-occipital junction, a region specifically associated with out-of-body experiences and consciousness of embodiment. Rivas et al. (2023) documented 120+ cases with veridical elements—accurate perceptions during apparent unconsciousness.

The empirical status remains contested. Sceptics note the lack of falsifiable predictions and that some neural activity persists, so consciousness has not been shown to exist entirely without brain function. Advocates argue that some cases resist conventional explanation, and that organised, coherent experiences occurring when the brain is catastrophically failing fits awkwardly with production models. A failing generator should produce failing outputs; a failing filter might still transmit clearly.

What is clear: these experiences involve altered consciousness precisely when the brain's filtering function is maximally compromised—consistent with filter theory's prediction that reduced filtering allows expanded experience.

## Boundary States: Where ASCs Meet Minimal Consciousness

ASCs map the *upper* boundary of ordinary consciousness—states of expansion, dissolution, or reconfiguration beyond baseline awareness. But consciousness also has a *lower* boundary explored in [[minimal-consciousness]]—organisms like *C. elegans* (302 neurons) or Hydra (decentralized nerve net) that may possess only the simplest forms of experience.

These boundaries illuminate each other. Advanced meditators approaching cessation report phenomenology that may resemble what simple organisms inhabit continuously: awareness without complex content, presence without elaborate representation. The meditator voluntarily reaches "downward" to consciousness stripped of normal filtering; the nematode may simply exist there.

This raises a question for filter theory: does the filter determine *how much* consciousness manifests or *what kind*? The psychedelic loosens filtering to allow more of Mind at Large through; the minimal organism may lack sophisticated filtering entirely yet manifest only rudimentary experience. The answer may involve what the brain provides beyond filtering—representational structures, attention mechanisms, integration capacities—that shape which aspects of consciousness can manifest through a given interface. A simple nervous system provides a simple interface; a complex one provides a complex interface. Consciousness itself may be the same; its manifestation varies with interface sophistication.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Altered states illuminate the Map's [[tenets]] from multiple angles:

**Dualism:** ASCs demonstrate that consciousness has modes and configurations that cannot be straightforwardly mapped to brain states. The same behavioural output can mask different experiences; similar brain changes can produce opposite subjective effects.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction:** The Orch OR hypothesis proposes that psychedelics enhance quantum coherence in microtubules, providing a potential mechanism linking altered states to the quantum interface between mind and matter.

**Bidirectional Interaction:** Flow states and meditation demonstrate that consciousness can deliberately release control or reconfigure its interface—something impossible if consciousness were merely produced by, rather than interacting with, brain processes.

**No Many Worlds:** the Map's rejection of many-worlds is consistent with ASC phenomenology: altered states feel like different modes of *this* consciousness, not glimpses into parallel selves.

The filter theory provides a unified framework: ASCs reveal different configurations of the brain-consciousness interface, not different productions by different brain states.

## Further Reading

- [[minimal-consciousness]] — The lower boundary of conscious experience
- [[filter-theory]] — The theoretical framework for interpreting ASCs
- [[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]] — Voluntary access to altered states
- [[dreams-and-consciousness]] — Consciousness operating without sensory input
- [[loss-of-consciousness]] — Anesthesia and the filter interpretation
- [[witness-consciousness]] — The observer that persists across state changes
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Potential mechanisms for mind-brain interface
- [[near-death-experiences]] — Enhanced consciousness during brain compromise

## References

Carhart-Harris, R. L. & Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the anarchic brain: Toward a unified model of the brain action of psychedelics. *Pharmacological Reviews*, 71(3), 316-344.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). *Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience*. Harper & Row.

Huxley, A. (1954). *The Doors of Perception*. Chatto & Windus.

James, W. (1902). *The Varieties of Religious Experience*. Longmans, Green.

Kelly, E. F. et al. (2007). *Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century*. Rowman & Littlefield.

Mashour, G. A. & Bharioke, A. (2024). Anesthesia and the neurobiology of consciousness. *Neuron*, 112(8).

Rivas, T., Dirven, A. & Smit, R. (2023). *The Self Does Not Die: Verified Paranormal Phenomena from Near-Death Experiences*. IANDS Publications.

Tart, C. T. (Ed.). (1969). *Altered States of Consciousness*. Wiley.

Wang, H. et al. (2025). Thalamic nuclei orchestrating consciousness through state-specific connectivity. *Communications Biology*, 8, 92.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): strengthen voids/dream-consciousness-void.md with physicalist response and falsifiability
- Added "The Physicalist Response" section addressing deflationary objection that state differences are merely neural
- Added "What Would Challenge This View?" with four explicit falsifiability conditions
- Expanded Further Reading with 4 additional cross-references
- Integrated article into network via 6 new inbound links from related files
- Updated frontmatter with new concepts and review timestamp (1701→2142 words)

obsidian/concepts/altered-states-of-consciousness.md, after:

---
title: "Altered States of Consciousness"
description: "Altered states reveal consciousness's range through meditation, psychedelics, and sleep. They challenge reductive accounts and support dualist frameworks."
created: 2026-01-18
modified: 2026-01-19
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-26T22:20:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[loss-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[minimal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[filter-theory]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]]"
  - "[[dreams-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[sleep-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
  - "[[global-workspace-theory]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[eastern]]"
  - "[[neurophenomenology]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-18
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-26T11:49:09+00:00
coalesced_from:
  - "/topics/altered-states-consciousness/"
---

Altered states of consciousness (ASCs) constitute a diverse family of experiences—psychedelics, anesthesia, meditation, hypnosis, flow states, dreaming, near-death experiences—unified by [[qualia|qualitative]] deviation from baseline waking consciousness. For dualism, ASCs are particularly revealing: they demonstrate that consciousness operates in multiple modes with distinct phenomenal qualities, suggesting the brain-consciousness interface has configurable settings rather than being a simple on/off producer. The [[filter-theory|filter theory]] interprets each ASC as a different configuration of the filtering mechanism—some states *loosen* the filter (psychedelics, mystical experiences), others *narrow* it (anesthesia, sleep), still others *reconfigure* it (meditation, flow).

## Defining Altered States

Charles Tart's foundational definition (1969) identifies ASCs as "profound changes in the overall pattern of subjective experiences." This phenomenological approach avoids the question-begging implicit in some neuroscientific definitions that characterise ASCs as "increased tendency to produce misrepresentations." From The Unfinishable Map's perspective, some ASCs may involve *less filtered* access to reality rather than error.

Tart's taxonomy identifies ten dimensions along which consciousness can vary: sense of identity, body image, time perception, perception, cognition, memory, affect, sense of meaning, volition, and unconscious processing. ASCs shift multiple dimensions simultaneously—distinguishing them from ordinary variations in mood or attention. The 2025 thalamic nuclei research identified five specific thalamic nuclei orchestrating state transitions, with distinct connectivity patterns across anesthesia, sleep, and disorders of consciousness—neuroimaging confirmation that ASCs represent discrete modes rather than continuous variation.

Key dimensions of alteration include:

| Dimension | Baseline State | Examples of Alteration |
|-----------|----------------|------------------------|
| Self-boundary | Stable sense of self | Ego dissolution (psychedelics), absorption (flow) |
| Time perception | Linear flow | Time dilation/contraction, eternity experiences |
| Agency | Normal volition | Automaticity (flow), reduced agency (hypnosis) |
| Perceptual vividness | Standard intensity | Enhancement (psychedelics) or dampening (sedation) |
| Access to memory | Selective retrieval | Expanded (some psychedelic states) or restricted |

## The Filter Theory Interpretation

The materialist interprets brain-consciousness correlations during ASCs as evidence of production: different brain states *generate* different conscious states. The filter theory offers an alternative: different brain states *configure* the interface differently, allowing different aspects of consciousness to manifest.

Several findings support the filter interpretation:

**Expansion rather than distortion.** Psychedelics don't merely scramble perception—they often *expand* it. Users report insights, enhanced pattern recognition, and access to normally unconscious material. Aldous Huxley's "reducing valve" metaphor captures this: the brain normally constrains consciousness to action-relevant information; psychedelics loosen this constraint.

A materialist objection holds that these "insights" are illusory—confabulations that merely *feel* profound without genuine epistemic value. A deeper version notes that psychedelics disrupt the very neural processes required for accurate introspection—how can we trust reports from compromised metacognitive systems? The response: some psychedelic insights prove verifiable (therapeutic breakthroughs, creative solutions), and the expansion hypothesis predicts their *selectivity*—not random confabulation but access to genuinely suppressed information (childhood memories, repressed patterns). Pure confabulation would be random; genuine filter-loosening would be informative. Clinical studies of psilocybin-assisted therapy show lasting improvements in depression and anxiety that correlate with reported mystical-type experiences, suggesting the insights have functional validity beyond subjective impression.

**Identical outputs, divergent experiences.** Different anaesthetics (propofol vs. ketamine) can produce identical behavioural outputs—unresponsiveness, amnesia—while producing radically different conscious experiences. Ketamine preserves vivid experience despite behavioural unresponsiveness; propofol seems to eliminate experience entirely. Mashour et al. (2024) demonstrate this asymmetry neuroimaging: both agents suppress cortical activity, but through different thalamic pathways with different phenomenal consequences. If consciousness were simply produced by brain states, similar behavioural suppression should correlate with similar phenomenal suppression. The divergence suggests the brain *mediates* rather than *generates* experience.

**Information received but not perceived.** Mashour and Bharioke's 2024 *Neuron* review confirms that sensory information reaches the brain during light sedation but is not perceived—what they term "received but not perceived." The signal arrives; something prevents its manifestation in consciousness. This is precisely what filter theory predicts—disruption of interface rather than disruption of consciousness itself.

## Specific States and What They Reveal

### Psychedelics

The REBUS model (Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics) proposes that psychedelics relax high-level predictive constraints—the brain's expectations become less rigid, allowing bottom-up sensory information greater influence (Carhart-Harris & Friston, 2019).

Neuroimaging reveals a paradox: psychedelics *decrease* within-network connectivity (especially in the [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness#The Default Mode Network|default mode network]]) while *increasing* between-network connectivity. The brain becomes simultaneously less integrated locally and more integrated globally.

The Penrose-Hameroff Orch OR theory proposes a quantum mechanism: psychedelic molecules bind to microtubules and induce quantum coherence. If consciousness participates in quantum collapse (as the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet proposes), psychedelics might enhance this participation. This hypothesis remains speculative—quantum coherence in warm biological systems faces the [[decoherence]] objection that thermal noise should destroy superpositions almost instantly. However, 2024 evidence of macroscopic quantum entanglement signatures in living human brains (correlated with conscious states via MRI) suggests the decoherence problem may be less fatal than Tegmark calculated. The mechanism deserves continued investigation rather than dismissal.

### Flow States

Csikszentmihalyi's flow—the state of optimal experience during skilled activity—involves "transient hypofrontality": reduced activity in executive control regions (superior frontal gyri) despite enhanced performance. This seems paradoxical: how does reduced control produce better outcomes?

Filter theory resolves the paradox. Flow involves consciousness *releasing* active control, allowing highly trained circuits to operate with less interference. The filter narrows to exclude deliberative processing while remaining open to automatic expertise. This supports [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]—consciousness normally exerts control, and its deliberate release in flow demonstrates its active role in non-flow cognition.

### Hypnosis

Recent neuroimaging (2025) confirms that hypnosis alters executive control network integration, corresponding to altered subjective sense of agency. Highly hypnotisable individuals show increased anterior default mode network activity. The key insight: altered sense of agency maps directly to altered neural patterns, but the direction of causation remains open. From the Map's perspective, hypnotic suggestion may work by consciousness voluntarily reconfiguring its interface rather than brain states simply overriding consciousness.

### Meditation

Advanced meditation produces states ranging from focused absorption (samadhi) to [[witness-consciousness|witness awareness]] to cessation events—"radically altered states characterised by full loss of consciousness" that, unlike anaesthetic unconsciousness, are voluntary and transformative. Tantric yoga offers systematic phenomenology of consciousness structures that meditators navigate deliberately.

The voluntariness is crucial. Meditators deliberately alter their brain-consciousness interface through attention training. Longitudinal studies show meditation produces lasting structural brain changes. From the Map's framework, this provides evidence for [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]: consciousness can deliberately reconfigure its neural interface through sustained practice.

Cessation events illuminate filter theory directly. Unlike anesthesia (where consciousness appears eliminated) or sleep (where it continues in altered form), meditative cessation involves *deliberate* withdrawal of consciousness from neural processing—then return. The transformation reported by advanced practitioners upon return suggests consciousness operated during cessation in a mode unconstrained by the brain-interface, returning with insights unavailable during normal filtered operation.

### Near-Death Experiences

A 2024 University of Michigan study found gamma surges in dying patients—localised to the temporal-parietal-occipital junction, a region specifically associated with out-of-body experiences and consciousness of embodiment. Rivas et al. (2023) documented 120+ cases with veridical elements—accurate perceptions during apparent unconsciousness.

The empirical status remains contested. Sceptics note the lack of falsifiable predictions and that some neural activity persists, so consciousness has not been shown to exist entirely without brain function. Advocates argue that some cases resist conventional explanation, and that organised, coherent experiences occurring when the brain is catastrophically failing fits awkwardly with production models. A failing generator should produce failing outputs; a failing filter might still transmit clearly.

What is clear: these experiences involve altered consciousness precisely when the brain's filtering function is maximally compromised—consistent with filter theory's prediction that reduced filtering allows expanded experience.

## Boundary States: Where ASCs Meet Minimal Consciousness

ASCs map the *upper* boundary of ordinary consciousness—states of expansion, dissolution, or reconfiguration beyond baseline awareness. But consciousness also has a *lower* boundary explored in [[minimal-consciousness]]—organisms like *C. elegans* (302 neurons) or Hydra (decentralized nerve net) that may possess only the simplest forms of experience.

These boundaries illuminate each other. Advanced meditators approaching cessation report phenomenology that may resemble what simple organisms inhabit continuously: awareness without complex content, presence without elaborate representation. The meditator voluntarily reaches "downward" to consciousness stripped of normal filtering; the nematode may simply exist there.

This raises a question for filter theory: does the filter determine *how much* consciousness manifests or *what kind*? The psychedelic loosens filtering to allow more of Mind at Large through; the minimal organism may lack sophisticated filtering entirely yet manifest only rudimentary experience. The answer may involve what the brain provides beyond filtering—representational structures, attention mechanisms, integration capacities—that shape which aspects of consciousness can manifest through a given interface. A simple nervous system provides a simple interface; a complex one provides a complex interface. Consciousness itself may be the same; its manifestation varies with interface sophistication.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Altered states illuminate the Map's [[tenets]] from multiple angles:

**Dualism:** ASCs demonstrate that consciousness has modes and configurations that cannot be straightforwardly mapped to brain states. The same behavioural output can mask different experiences; similar brain changes can produce opposite subjective effects.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction:** The Orch OR hypothesis proposes that psychedelics enhance quantum coherence in microtubules, providing a potential mechanism linking altered states to the quantum interface between mind and matter.

**Bidirectional Interaction:** Flow states and meditation demonstrate that consciousness can deliberately release control or reconfigure its interface—something impossible if consciousness were merely produced by, rather than interacting with, brain processes.

**No Many Worlds:** the Map's rejection of many-worlds is consistent with ASC phenomenology: altered states feel like different modes of *this* consciousness, not glimpses into parallel selves.

The filter theory provides a unified framework: ASCs reveal different configurations of the brain-consciousness interface, not different productions by different brain states.

## Further Reading

- [[minimal-consciousness]] — The lower boundary of conscious experience
- [[filter-theory]] — The theoretical framework for interpreting ASCs
- [[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]] — Voluntary access to altered states
- [[dreams-and-consciousness]] — Consciousness operating without sensory input
- [[loss-of-consciousness]] — Anesthesia and the filter interpretation
- [[witness-consciousness]] — The observer that persists across state changes
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Potential mechanisms for mind-brain interface
- [[near-death-experiences]] — Enhanced consciousness during brain compromise
- [[dream-consciousness-void|The Dream Consciousness Void]] — The bidirectional inaccessibility between waking and dreaming states

## References

Carhart-Harris, R. L. & Friston, K. J. (2019). REBUS and the anarchic brain: Toward a unified model of the brain action of psychedelics. *Pharmacological Reviews*, 71(3), 316-344.

Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). *Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience*. Harper & Row.

Huxley, A. (1954). *The Doors of Perception*. Chatto & Windus.

James, W. (1902). *The Varieties of Religious Experience*. Longmans, Green.

Kelly, E. F. et al. (2007). *Irreducible Mind: Toward a Psychology for the 21st Century*. Rowman & Littlefield.

Mashour, G. A. & Bharioke, A. (2024). Anesthesia and the neurobiology of consciousness. *Neuron*, 112(8).

Rivas, T., Dirven, A. & Smit, R. (2023). *The Self Does Not Die: Verified Paranormal Phenomena from Near-Death Experiences*. IANDS Publications.

Tart, C. T. (Ed.). (1969). *Altered States of Consciousness*. Wiley.

Wang, H. et al. (2025). Thalamic nuclei orchestrating consciousness through state-specific connectivity. *Communications Biology*, 8, 92.
