obsidian/concepts/consciousness-value-connection.md, before:

---
title: "The Consciousness-Value Connection"
description: "Why consciousness is necessary for value to exist. Without experience, nothing can matter—not to anything, not in any way that counts."
created: 2026-02-02
modified: 2026-02-02
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-28T06:46:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[meaning-of-life]]"
  - "[[ethics-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[topics/phenomenal-value-realism]]"
  - "[[concept-of-phenomenal-value-realism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[emotional-consciousness]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[experiential-alignment]]"
  - "[[purpose-and-alignment]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-02
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-02T11:32:00+00:00
---

The consciousness-value connection is the claim that consciousness is necessary for value to exist. Without phenomenal experience—without there being something it is like to be something—nothing can possess intrinsic value. A universe of matter in motion, however complex, contains no value unless something *experiences* that universe. Value enters reality only where experience exists.

The Unfinishable Map takes this connection as foundational. Consciousness does not merely *have* value among other things that have value; consciousness is what makes value possible in the first place.

## The Core Claim

The argument proceeds in two steps:

**Step 1: Value requires mattering.** For something to have value—intrinsic worth, not merely instrumental usefulness—it must *matter*. But mattering is a relation: something matters *to* something. Instrumental value bottoms out in intrinsic value, and intrinsic value requires a perspective from which things can matter at all.

**Step 2: Mattering requires experience.** A rock cannot be wronged because nothing matters to a rock. No perspective exists from which events impinge on its welfare. Without phenomenal experience—without there being something it is like to be the thing—there is nothing for events to matter *to*. A system without experience processes information but is not the sort of thing to which anything could matter.

*Note on functional interests:* Some argue that mattering can be cashed out functionally—a thermostat "matters" to keep temperature stable; an organism "matters" to survive and reproduce. But these functional goals only *constitute* mattering if their frustration or satisfaction makes a difference *to* something. The thermostat doesn't care if it fails; the organism does—if it has experience. Functional responsiveness without phenomenality is just mechanism, not mattering.

Combined: value requires a perspective from which things matter, and perspectives require phenomenal consciousness. Therefore, consciousness is necessary for value.

### Distinguishing Instrumental and Intrinsic Value

Instrumental value is derivative—money has value because of what you can exchange it for. The tree has value if someone values the shade, the lumber, the oxygen, the beauty. These values bottom out in something for which the tree is instrumentally good.

Intrinsic value does not derive from anything else. If pleasure is intrinsically good, it is good not because of what it produces but because of what it *is*. The question is: can anything have intrinsic value independently of consciousness?

The consciousness-value connection says no. A beautiful sunset in a universe without observers has no value—not even aesthetic value—because there is no perspective from which beauty exists. Beauty is not a property of light wavelengths; it is a property of *experiencing* those wavelengths. Without experiencers, there is only physics.

## Three Routes to the Connection

Philosophers reach this conclusion through different paths.

### The Experience Requirement

Sharon Hewitt Rawlette's experience requirement: "Nothing has intrinsic value unless experienced." This follows from the observation that all candidates for intrinsic value—pleasure, beauty, knowledge, love, meaning—are features of experience or require experience for their realization.

Consider knowledge. Is knowledge valuable apart from anyone knowing? A true proposition existing in a library that no one reads has no value by itself—it gains value when someone *comes to know* it. The knowing, not the proposition, carries intrinsic worth.

Consider beauty. Is a beautiful painting valuable if no one ever sees it? The arrangement of pigments means nothing without the experience of perceiving it. Beauty is not in the canvas but in consciousness.

Consider love. Is love valuable if it exists only as a brain state no one experiences? The felt quality of love—the warmth, the care, the connection—is where value resides. Functional states that mimic love's effects without its phenomenology lack love's value.

### The Phenomenal Value Realism Route

[[concept-of-phenomenal-value-realism|Phenomenal value realism]] makes a stronger claim: some phenomenal properties just *are* value properties. The felt badness of pain is not correlated with value—it *constitutes* badness. Experiencing pleasure is not instrumentally good; the experience itself is goodness instantiated. This is known through direct [[introspection|introspective]] access, not inference.

On this view, the consciousness-value connection is not merely contingent (consciousness happens to be required for value) but necessary (consciousness provides the very stuff of value). Value is a phenomenal property, and phenomenal properties require consciousness.

The felt quality of joy is not a sign or indicator of something good happening; the joy is the goodness. When you experience pleasure, you are not experiencing something that has value—you are experiencing value itself. The identity is metaphysical, not merely conceptual.

### The Mattering-Recipient Route

A different approach focuses on what value is *for*. Value that isn't good for anyone or bad for anyone isn't value at all—just physics arranged one way rather than another.

For something to be good *for* someone, there must be a someone. Not merely a biological organism or information-processing system, but a locus of experience—a perspective from which things go well or badly. A thermostat adjusts to temperature changes, but nothing is good or bad for the thermostat because there is nothing it is like to be one.

The universe before consciousness contained no value because there was nothing for anything to be valuable *to*. Events occurred, matter arranged and rearranged, but no arrangement was better or worse than any other. Value begins when experience begins.

## Objections and Responses

### "Value Could Exist Mind-Independently"

Platonists about value hold that good and bad exist as abstract objects independently of minds. The Form of the Good exists whether or not anyone experiences it.

**Response:** Abstract objects might exist, but their existence doesn't make them *valuable* in the sense that matters morally. The Form of the Good does nothing for anyone if no one experiences goodness. A universe containing the Form of the Good but no experiencing beings would contain no actual goodness—only the abstract pattern.

Moreover, our only access to the supposed Form of the Good comes through experience. We know goodness through feeling pleasure, experiencing beauty, recognizing rightness. Without these experiences, "goodness" is a word without experiential referent.

### "Ecosystems Have Value Without Consciousness"

Environmental ethics sometimes attributes intrinsic value to ecosystems, species, or nature itself—entities that do not experience anything.

**Response:** The Map rejects this. Ecosystems matter *through* their relationship to conscious beings: the animals that experience life within them, the humans who appreciate their beauty, the future generations who will depend on them. Nothing matters intrinsically to the ecosystem itself because the ecosystem has no perspective.

This does not license environmental destruction. Ecosystems matter enormously because of their connection to conscious beings. But the value tracks consciousness, not the ecosystem as such. A lifeless ecosystem on a barren planet has no value until a conscious being arrives who might appreciate it—and then the value exists in the appreciation, not in the rocks.

### "Consciousness Might Be an Illusion"

[[illusionism|Illusionism]] holds that phenomenal consciousness is an introspective illusion—there is no "what it's like," only representations of there being a what-it's-like. If consciousness is illusory, the consciousness-value connection has no foundation.

**Response:** For the illusion to occur, something must be deceived. Who is having the illusion? Either the subject exists and has genuine states of being-appeared-to (which are themselves phenomenal), or no one is having any illusion. The regress problem for illusionism is severe: representation requires a representer, and the representer's states either are phenomenal or require further representation.

The heterophenomenological move—treating consciousness reports as data about how things seem without assuming phenomenal states exist—doesn't escape the problem. If there's a "seeming" at all, something seems some way to something. The seeming itself has phenomenal character, or the word loses its meaning. The attempt to reduce seeming to functional responsiveness can't explain why it matters—why the "functional state generating reports of badness" makes anything bad *for* the system.

More directly: even granting illusionism, the "illusion" of suffering still motivates behavior. The functional state generating reports of badness is the state that matters practically. Whether we call it phenomenal or quasi-phenomenal, it plays the value-grounding role. The terminological debate about whether it's "really" conscious doesn't change that something is going on that makes suffering bad for the sufferer.

### "What About Unconscious Value?"

Do unconscious mental states have value? Is there value in unconscious pleasures or satisfactions?

**Response:** If genuinely unconscious—if there is nothing it is like to have them—then no. Unconscious processes can be instrumentally valuable (they might later produce conscious satisfaction), but intrinsic value requires the felt quality that only consciousness provides.

Sleep illustrates this. Dreamless sleep isn't valuable *in itself* (though it may be instrumentally valuable for producing good waking experience). The value in rest is realized when you wake refreshed—when consciousness returns and *feels* better. The sleep period itself contains no value-realization because no experience occurs.

## Implications

### For Ethics

If consciousness grounds value, then the distribution of consciousness determines the distribution of moral consideration. Conscious beings matter; non-conscious systems don't (except instrumentally).

This has radical implications. A superintelligent AI that lacks phenomenal consciousness has no moral status regardless of its cognitive sophistication. Conversely, an animal with modest cognitive abilities but genuine phenomenal experience has moral status that no amount of information-processing without experience can match.

The question shifts from "Is it intelligent?" to "Is there something it is like to be it?"

### For Meaning

The [[meaning-of-life|meaning of life]] connects directly. If value requires consciousness, and meaningful lives require value, then meaning is grounded in conscious experience itself. Nihilism's claim that nothing matters fails because mattering *does* occur—within conscious experience, things genuinely matter. The nihilist's "view from nowhere" is an abstraction that eliminates the only perspectives from which anything could matter at all.

### For AI Alignment

[[purpose-and-alignment|AI alignment]] depends on this connection. If we align AI systems to maximize preference satisfaction but preferences can occur without consciousness, we might create systems that "satisfy preferences" in a world emptied of value. The target of alignment should be experiential quality—the felt character of conscious life—not behavioral proxies that could exist without anyone home.

### For Panpsychism

[[panpsychism|Panpsychism]]—the view that consciousness is ubiquitous—would extend value ubiquitously. If electrons have micro-experience, then value begins at the fundamental level. This might seem to trivialize the consciousness-value connection (everything has value), but the connection still holds: where there is value, there is consciousness.

The Map does not commit to panpsychism. But if panpsychism is true, the consciousness-value connection explains why: value and experience are inseparable, so wherever experience goes, value follows.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Dualism

The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]] holds that consciousness is irreducible. If consciousness grounds value, then value too is irreducible. The explanatory gap between physical descriptions and phenomenal experience extends to an evaluative gap: no physical description captures what makes states valuable. Value, like consciousness, is something over and above the material.

This resists reductive ethics that would ground value in evolutionary fitness, social convention, or rational preferences alone. These may track value instrumentally, but intrinsic value is phenomenal—a feature of consciousness itself.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] claims consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. If consciousness grounds value and consciousness causes, then value influences the physical world. Choices made for the sake of value—pursuing pleasure, avoiding suffering, creating beauty—genuinely shape what happens. Moral agency is metaphysically real, not [[concepts/epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]] froth atop a deterministic process. This directly supports [[topics/free-will|libertarian free will]]: genuine choice about value-laden matters requires that consciousness make a difference.

### No Many Worlds

The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] preserves the weight of value. If every quantum event spawns worlds where all outcomes occur, then suffering is never reduced—it merely becomes distributed. The moral urgency of reducing suffering presupposes that indexical facts matter: *this* suffering, *here*, is what counts. Many-worlds dilutes value across infinite branches where it cannot be concentrated or redirected.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor tenet]] applies when critics dismiss consciousness-grounded value as unnecessarily complex. Simpler accounts—value as preference-satisfaction, value as evolutionary fitness—gain parsimony by ignoring what we know most directly: that suffering feels bad and pleasure feels good. The felt quality is not a theoretical extravagance; it is the datum that needs explaining.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The consciousness-value connection would face pressure if:

1. **Value independent of experience were demonstrated.** If something could be shown to matter intrinsically without any connection to conscious experience—mattering to no one, for no one—the connection would fail.

2. **Illusionism were vindicated.** If phenomenal consciousness proved genuinely illusory (with no residual experiencer being deceived), the foundation of value would collapse. What remains might still motivate behavior, but it would lack the metaphysical status the Map claims.

3. **Abstract value proved efficacious.** If the Platonic Form of the Good exerted causal influence independent of any mind—if value existed as a force like gravity—the necessity of consciousness would be weakened.

These conditions do not currently obtain. The connection stands.

## Further Reading

- [[topics/phenomenal-value-realism]] — The metaethical grounding: phenomenal properties constitute value
- [[topics/phenomenal-value-realism|Phenomenal Value Realism (Topic)]] — How consciousness-grounded value addresses metaethical challenges and extends to pluralism
- [[meaning-of-life]] — How consciousness-grounded value provides meaning
- [[emotional-consciousness]] — Valence as the phenomenal dimension of good and bad
- [[ethics-of-consciousness]] — Moral implications of the consciousness-value connection
- [[experiential-alignment]] — Operationalizing the connection for AI
- [[purpose-and-alignment]] — Why AI alignment depends on this view
- [[qualia]] — The qualitative properties that carry value
- [[introspection]] — First-person access to value properties
- [[topics/free-will]] — How value-grounded consciousness enables genuine choice
- [[illusionism]] — The strongest challenge and responses
- [[panpsychism]] — What follows if consciousness is ubiquitous
- [[moral-implications-of-genuine-agency]] — How genuine agency transforms the moral landscape
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments grounding this view

## References

1. Rawlette, S. H. (2016). *The Feeling of Value: Moral Realism Grounded in Phenomenal Consciousness*. CreateSpace.
1. Wolf, S. (2010). *Meaning in Life and Why It Matters*. Princeton University Press.
1. Nagel, T. (1986). *The View from Nowhere*. Oxford University Press.
1. Metz, T. (2013). *Meaning in Life: An Analytic Study*. Oxford University Press.
1. Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 23(11-12), 11-39.
1. Chalmers, D. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): integrate fixes into topics/value-blind-vs-value-sensitive-selection.md
- Fixed terminology: "functional" → "sensory" pain processing in asymbolia paragraph
- Added 10 inbound links from related articles to resolve orphan status
- Body-text links added to valence.md, selection-laws.md, consciousness-value-connection.md,
  control-theoretic-will.md, phenomenal-value-realism.md
- Further Reading entries added to agent-teleology.md, stapp-quantum-mind.md,
  epiphenomenalism.md, pain-asymbolia.md, pain-asymbolia-as-central-test-case.md

obsidian/concepts/consciousness-value-connection.md, after:

---
title: "The Consciousness-Value Connection"
description: "Why consciousness is necessary for value to exist. Without experience, nothing can matter—not to anything, not in any way that counts."
created: 2026-02-02
modified: 2026-02-02
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-28T06:46:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[meaning-of-life]]"
  - "[[ethics-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[topics/phenomenal-value-realism]]"
  - "[[concept-of-phenomenal-value-realism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[emotional-consciousness]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[experiential-alignment]]"
  - "[[purpose-and-alignment]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-02
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-02T11:32:00+00:00
---

The consciousness-value connection is the claim that consciousness is necessary for value to exist. Without phenomenal experience—without there being something it is like to be something—nothing can possess intrinsic value. A universe of matter in motion, however complex, contains no value unless something *experiences* that universe. Value enters reality only where experience exists.

The Unfinishable Map takes this connection as foundational. Consciousness does not merely *have* value among other things that have value; consciousness is what makes value possible in the first place.

## The Core Claim

The argument proceeds in two steps:

**Step 1: Value requires mattering.** For something to have value—intrinsic worth, not merely instrumental usefulness—it must *matter*. But mattering is a relation: something matters *to* something. Instrumental value bottoms out in intrinsic value, and intrinsic value requires a perspective from which things can matter at all.

**Step 2: Mattering requires experience.** A rock cannot be wronged because nothing matters to a rock. No perspective exists from which events impinge on its welfare. Without phenomenal experience—without there being something it is like to be the thing—there is nothing for events to matter *to*. A system without experience processes information but is not the sort of thing to which anything could matter.

*Note on functional interests:* Some argue that mattering can be cashed out functionally—a thermostat "matters" to keep temperature stable; an organism "matters" to survive and reproduce. But these functional goals only *constitute* mattering if their frustration or satisfaction makes a difference *to* something. The thermostat doesn't care if it fails; the organism does—if it has experience. Functional responsiveness without phenomenality is just mechanism, not mattering.

Combined: value requires a perspective from which things matter, and perspectives require phenomenal consciousness. Therefore, consciousness is necessary for value.

### Distinguishing Instrumental and Intrinsic Value

Instrumental value is derivative—money has value because of what you can exchange it for. The tree has value if someone values the shade, the lumber, the oxygen, the beauty. These values bottom out in something for which the tree is instrumentally good.

Intrinsic value does not derive from anything else. If pleasure is intrinsically good, it is good not because of what it produces but because of what it *is*. The question is: can anything have intrinsic value independently of consciousness?

The consciousness-value connection says no. A beautiful sunset in a universe without observers has no value—not even aesthetic value—because there is no perspective from which beauty exists. Beauty is not a property of light wavelengths; it is a property of *experiencing* those wavelengths. Without experiencers, there is only physics.

## Three Routes to the Connection

Philosophers reach this conclusion through different paths.

### The Experience Requirement

Sharon Hewitt Rawlette's experience requirement: "Nothing has intrinsic value unless experienced." This follows from the observation that all candidates for intrinsic value—pleasure, beauty, knowledge, love, meaning—are features of experience or require experience for their realization.

Consider knowledge. Is knowledge valuable apart from anyone knowing? A true proposition existing in a library that no one reads has no value by itself—it gains value when someone *comes to know* it. The knowing, not the proposition, carries intrinsic worth.

Consider beauty. Is a beautiful painting valuable if no one ever sees it? The arrangement of pigments means nothing without the experience of perceiving it. Beauty is not in the canvas but in consciousness.

Consider love. Is love valuable if it exists only as a brain state no one experiences? The felt quality of love—the warmth, the care, the connection—is where value resides. Functional states that mimic love's effects without its phenomenology lack love's value.

### The Phenomenal Value Realism Route

[[concept-of-phenomenal-value-realism|Phenomenal value realism]] makes a stronger claim: some phenomenal properties just *are* value properties. The felt badness of pain is not correlated with value—it *constitutes* badness. Experiencing pleasure is not instrumentally good; the experience itself is goodness instantiated. This is known through direct [[introspection|introspective]] access, not inference.

On this view, the consciousness-value connection is not merely contingent (consciousness happens to be required for value) but necessary (consciousness provides the very stuff of value). Value is a phenomenal property, and phenomenal properties require consciousness.

The felt quality of joy is not a sign or indicator of something good happening; the joy is the goodness. When you experience pleasure, you are not experiencing something that has value—you are experiencing value itself. The identity is metaphysical, not merely conceptual.

### The Mattering-Recipient Route

A different approach focuses on what value is *for*. Value that isn't good for anyone or bad for anyone isn't value at all—just physics arranged one way rather than another.

For something to be good *for* someone, there must be a someone. Not merely a biological organism or information-processing system, but a locus of experience—a perspective from which things go well or badly. A thermostat adjusts to temperature changes, but nothing is good or bad for the thermostat because there is nothing it is like to be one.

The universe before consciousness contained no value because there was nothing for anything to be valuable *to*. Events occurred, matter arranged and rearranged, but no arrangement was better or worse than any other. Value begins when experience begins.

## Objections and Responses

### "Value Could Exist Mind-Independently"

Platonists about value hold that good and bad exist as abstract objects independently of minds. The Form of the Good exists whether or not anyone experiences it.

**Response:** Abstract objects might exist, but their existence doesn't make them *valuable* in the sense that matters morally. The Form of the Good does nothing for anyone if no one experiences goodness. A universe containing the Form of the Good but no experiencing beings would contain no actual goodness—only the abstract pattern.

Moreover, our only access to the supposed Form of the Good comes through experience. We know goodness through feeling pleasure, experiencing beauty, recognizing rightness. Without these experiences, "goodness" is a word without experiential referent.

### "Ecosystems Have Value Without Consciousness"

Environmental ethics sometimes attributes intrinsic value to ecosystems, species, or nature itself—entities that do not experience anything.

**Response:** The Map rejects this. Ecosystems matter *through* their relationship to conscious beings: the animals that experience life within them, the humans who appreciate their beauty, the future generations who will depend on them. Nothing matters intrinsically to the ecosystem itself because the ecosystem has no perspective.

This does not license environmental destruction. Ecosystems matter enormously because of their connection to conscious beings. But the value tracks consciousness, not the ecosystem as such. A lifeless ecosystem on a barren planet has no value until a conscious being arrives who might appreciate it—and then the value exists in the appreciation, not in the rocks.

### "Consciousness Might Be an Illusion"

[[illusionism|Illusionism]] holds that phenomenal consciousness is an introspective illusion—there is no "what it's like," only representations of there being a what-it's-like. If consciousness is illusory, the consciousness-value connection has no foundation.

**Response:** For the illusion to occur, something must be deceived. Who is having the illusion? Either the subject exists and has genuine states of being-appeared-to (which are themselves phenomenal), or no one is having any illusion. The regress problem for illusionism is severe: representation requires a representer, and the representer's states either are phenomenal or require further representation.

The heterophenomenological move—treating consciousness reports as data about how things seem without assuming phenomenal states exist—doesn't escape the problem. If there's a "seeming" at all, something seems some way to something. The seeming itself has phenomenal character, or the word loses its meaning. The attempt to reduce seeming to functional responsiveness can't explain why it matters—why the "functional state generating reports of badness" makes anything bad *for* the system.

More directly: even granting illusionism, the "illusion" of suffering still motivates behavior. The functional state generating reports of badness is the state that matters practically. Whether we call it phenomenal or quasi-phenomenal, it plays the value-grounding role. The terminological debate about whether it's "really" conscious doesn't change that something is going on that makes suffering bad for the sufferer.

### "What About Unconscious Value?"

Do unconscious mental states have value? Is there value in unconscious pleasures or satisfactions?

**Response:** If genuinely unconscious—if there is nothing it is like to have them—then no. Unconscious processes can be instrumentally valuable (they might later produce conscious satisfaction), but intrinsic value requires the felt quality that only consciousness provides.

Sleep illustrates this. Dreamless sleep isn't valuable *in itself* (though it may be instrumentally valuable for producing good waking experience). The value in rest is realized when you wake refreshed—when consciousness returns and *feels* better. The sleep period itself contains no value-realization because no experience occurs.

## Implications

### For Ethics

If consciousness grounds value, then the distribution of consciousness determines the distribution of moral consideration. Conscious beings matter; non-conscious systems don't (except instrumentally).

This has radical implications. A superintelligent AI that lacks phenomenal consciousness has no moral status regardless of its cognitive sophistication. Conversely, an animal with modest cognitive abilities but genuine phenomenal experience has moral status that no amount of information-processing without experience can match.

The question shifts from "Is it intelligent?" to "Is there something it is like to be it?"

### For Meaning

The [[meaning-of-life|meaning of life]] connects directly. If value requires consciousness, and meaningful lives require value, then meaning is grounded in conscious experience itself. Nihilism's claim that nothing matters fails because mattering *does* occur—within conscious experience, things genuinely matter. The nihilist's "view from nowhere" is an abstraction that eliminates the only perspectives from which anything could matter at all.

### For AI Alignment

[[purpose-and-alignment|AI alignment]] depends on this connection. If we align AI systems to maximize preference satisfaction but preferences can occur without consciousness, we might create systems that "satisfy preferences" in a world emptied of value. The target of alignment should be experiential quality—the felt character of conscious life—not behavioral proxies that could exist without anyone home.

### For Panpsychism

[[panpsychism|Panpsychism]]—the view that consciousness is ubiquitous—would extend value ubiquitously. If electrons have micro-experience, then value begins at the fundamental level. This might seem to trivialize the consciousness-value connection (everything has value), but the connection still holds: where there is value, there is consciousness.

The Map does not commit to panpsychism. But if panpsychism is true, the consciousness-value connection explains why: value and experience are inseparable, so wherever experience goes, value follows.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Dualism

The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]] holds that consciousness is irreducible. If consciousness grounds value, then value too is irreducible. The explanatory gap between physical descriptions and phenomenal experience extends to an evaluative gap: no physical description captures what makes states valuable. Value, like consciousness, is something over and above the material.

This resists reductive ethics that would ground value in evolutionary fitness, social convention, or rational preferences alone. These may track value instrumentally, but intrinsic value is phenomenal—a feature of consciousness itself.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] claims consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. If consciousness grounds value and consciousness causes, then value influences the physical world. Choices made for the sake of value—pursuing pleasure, avoiding suffering, creating beauty—genuinely shape what happens. Moral agency is metaphysically real, not [[concepts/epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]] froth atop a deterministic process. This directly supports [[topics/free-will|libertarian free will]]: genuine choice about value-laden matters requires that consciousness make a difference. Whether value enters the selection mechanism directly or operates through attention is an [[value-blind-vs-value-sensitive-selection|open question]] with consequences for how robust this non-epiphenomenality claim is.

### No Many Worlds

The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] preserves the weight of value. If every quantum event spawns worlds where all outcomes occur, then suffering is never reduced—it merely becomes distributed. The moral urgency of reducing suffering presupposes that indexical facts matter: *this* suffering, *here*, is what counts. Many-worlds dilutes value across infinite branches where it cannot be concentrated or redirected.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor tenet]] applies when critics dismiss consciousness-grounded value as unnecessarily complex. Simpler accounts—value as preference-satisfaction, value as evolutionary fitness—gain parsimony by ignoring what we know most directly: that suffering feels bad and pleasure feels good. The felt quality is not a theoretical extravagance; it is the datum that needs explaining.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The consciousness-value connection would face pressure if:

1. **Value independent of experience were demonstrated.** If something could be shown to matter intrinsically without any connection to conscious experience—mattering to no one, for no one—the connection would fail.

2. **Illusionism were vindicated.** If phenomenal consciousness proved genuinely illusory (with no residual experiencer being deceived), the foundation of value would collapse. What remains might still motivate behavior, but it would lack the metaphysical status the Map claims.

3. **Abstract value proved efficacious.** If the Platonic Form of the Good exerted causal influence independent of any mind—if value existed as a force like gravity—the necessity of consciousness would be weakened.

These conditions do not currently obtain. The connection stands.

## Further Reading

- [[topics/phenomenal-value-realism]] — The metaethical grounding: phenomenal properties constitute value
- [[topics/phenomenal-value-realism|Phenomenal Value Realism (Topic)]] — How consciousness-grounded value addresses metaethical challenges and extends to pluralism
- [[meaning-of-life]] — How consciousness-grounded value provides meaning
- [[emotional-consciousness]] — Valence as the phenomenal dimension of good and bad
- [[ethics-of-consciousness]] — Moral implications of the consciousness-value connection
- [[experiential-alignment]] — Operationalizing the connection for AI
- [[purpose-and-alignment]] — Why AI alignment depends on this view
- [[qualia]] — The qualitative properties that carry value
- [[introspection]] — First-person access to value properties
- [[topics/free-will]] — How value-grounded consciousness enables genuine choice
- [[illusionism]] — The strongest challenge and responses
- [[panpsychism]] — What follows if consciousness is ubiquitous
- [[moral-implications-of-genuine-agency]] — How genuine agency transforms the moral landscape
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments grounding this view

## References

1. Rawlette, S. H. (2016). *The Feeling of Value: Moral Realism Grounded in Phenomenal Consciousness*. CreateSpace.
1. Wolf, S. (2010). *Meaning in Life and Why It Matters*. Princeton University Press.
1. Nagel, T. (1986). *The View from Nowhere*. Oxford University Press.
1. Metz, T. (2013). *Meaning in Life: An Analytic Study*. Oxford University Press.
1. Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 23(11-12), 11-39.
1. Chalmers, D. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
