obsidian/concepts/consciousness.md, before:

---
title: "Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-24
modified: 2026-01-24
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-24T03:25:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[access-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[unity-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[intentionality]]"
  - "[[self-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[temporal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[altered-states-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[evolution-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[minimal-consciousness]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[baseline-cognition]]"
  - "[[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-24
last_curated: null
---

Consciousness is what it is like to be something—the subjective, first-person perspective that accompanies perception, thought, emotion, and action. When you see colour, feel pain, or think about tomorrow, something experiential is happening: there is a "what it's like" quality to these states that distinguishes them from unconscious information processing.

The Unfinishable Map treats consciousness as irreducible. The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]] holds that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes; the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences the physical world. This page serves as an overview and hub for the Map's extensive treatment of consciousness, connecting to specific concepts, theories, and arguments developed across the site.

## What Consciousness Is {#what-it-is}

Consciousness is the central fact of mental life—the one thing we cannot coherently doubt. Descartes's *cogito* captures this: whatever else we might be wrong about, we cannot be mistaken that there is something it is like to be us right now.

Three aspects characterise consciousness:

**Subjectivity**: Consciousness is essentially first-personal. There is a difference between being a system that processes information and being a system *for whom* there is something it is like to process information. A thermostat responds to temperature; a conscious being *experiences* temperature.

**Qualitative character**: Conscious states have phenomenal properties—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain. These [[qualia]] are what distinguish seeing from blindly processing visual data. They resist complete description in physical or functional terms.

**Unity**: Consciousness presents as a unified field. You don't experience separate colours, sounds, and thoughts but a single integrated experience in which all contents appear together. This [[unity-of-consciousness|unity]] is itself philosophically puzzling—how do diverse neural processes yield a single experiential perspective?

## The Hard Problem {#hard-problem}

David Chalmers distinguished the "easy problems" of consciousness (explaining cognitive functions like discrimination, integration, and report) from the "hard problem": why is there something it is like to perform these functions at all?

The [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] concerns the [[explanatory-gap]] between physical description and phenomenal reality. We can map which brain regions correlate with which experiences (see [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]). We cannot explain *why* activity in V4 feels like colour rather than nothing at all.

The Map holds that the hard problem is not merely unsolved but unsolvable by physicalist methods. The gap reflects a genuine ontological distinction: consciousness is not identical to or fully explained by physical processes.

## Key Distinctions {#distinctions}

The Map's treatment of consciousness draws several crucial distinctions:

### Phenomenal vs Access Consciousness {#phenomenal-access}

[[Phenomenal-consciousness|Phenomenal consciousness]] (P-consciousness) is the experiential quality of mental states—what they feel like. [[Access-consciousness]] (A-consciousness) is information availability—what is poised for reasoning, report, and action. Ned Block introduced this distinction to isolate what physicalist theories can explain (access mechanisms) from what remains puzzling (phenomenology).

The distinction matters because:
- Physicalism succeeds at explaining access. [[Global-workspace-theory|Global Workspace Theory]] identifies how information becomes globally available.
- Physicalism struggles with phenomenology. Even a complete account of access mechanisms leaves the hard problem untouched.
- The two can dissociate. [[Blindsight]] demonstrates access without (or with degraded) phenomenology; the "overflow argument" suggests phenomenology exceeding access.

### Consciousness vs Awareness {#awareness}

"Awareness" sometimes means phenomenal consciousness and sometimes means access or attention without commitment to phenomenology. The Map reserves "consciousness" for the phenomenal sense—there is something it is like to be conscious. "Awareness" without phenomenal accompaniment (as claimed in some blindsight interpretations) would be information access without consciousness proper.

### Creature vs State Consciousness {#creature-state}

Creature consciousness asks which beings are conscious—which things have *any* experiences. State consciousness asks which mental states of a conscious being are themselves conscious—when you're thinking about dinner while brushing your teeth, is the brushing conscious?

Both questions connect to the Map's framework: creature consciousness relates to [[evolution-of-consciousness]] and [[minimal-consciousness]]; state consciousness relates to [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]] and attention.

## Theories of Consciousness {#theories}

Over 200 theories of consciousness exist. The Map engages with the most prominent while maintaining its dualist commitments.

### Physicalist Theories

**[[Functionalism]]** identifies consciousness with functional roles—inputs, outputs, and internal state transitions. On this view, consciousness is what brains do, not what they are made of. The Map rejects functionalism: [[philosophical-zombies|zombies]] (functional duplicates without consciousness) are conceivable, and [[inverted-qualia|inverted qualia]] (same function, different phenomenology) seem possible. Function doesn't determine phenomenology.

**[[Global-workspace-theory|Global Workspace Theory]]** (Baars, Dehaene) explains access consciousness via information broadcast to multiple cognitive systems. When information enters the "global workspace," it becomes available for report, reasoning, and action. This explains access but not phenomenology—why does global broadcast feel like anything?

**[[Integrated-information-theory|Integrated Information Theory]]** (Tononi) proposes that consciousness *is* integrated information (measured as Φ). IIT makes surprising predictions: even simple systems with high Φ would be conscious. The theory offers an interesting bridge between structure and experience but faces the hard problem at its foundation: why does integrated information feel like anything? The Map treats IIT as identifying a necessary condition that falls short of explanation.

**[[Illusionism]]** (Dennett, Frankish) denies phenomenal consciousness exists. We *represent* ourselves as having qualia, but the representation is false—there is no "what it's like," only the illusion of one. The Map rejects this as denying the phenomenon to be explained. Even illusions require something it is like to be under the illusion.

### Dualist Theories

**[[Interactionist-dualism|Interactionist Dualism]]** holds that consciousness is distinct from physical processes yet causally connected to them. This is the Map's position. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] specifies the interface: consciousness influences quantum indeterminacies without injecting energy.

**[[Epiphenomenalism]]** accepts dualism but denies causal efficacy—consciousness is a byproduct with no effects on the physical world. The Map rejects this: the very fact that we discuss consciousness shows that information about consciousness enters the physical domain, influencing speech and behaviour.

**[[Panpsychism]]** holds that consciousness is fundamental and ubiquitous—even simple physical systems have experiential aspects. This avoids the "emergence problem" (how does experience arise from non-experience?) but faces the [[combination-problem]] (how do micro-experiences combine into unified macro-experience?).

## Arguments for Irreducibility {#arguments}

Multiple independent arguments converge on consciousness's irreducibility:

**The [[knowledge-argument|Knowledge Argument]]**: Mary knows all physical facts about colour vision but learns something new when she first sees colour. Phenomenal facts exceed physical facts.

**The [[philosophical-zombies|Conceivability Argument]]**: Zombies (physical duplicates without consciousness) are conceivable. If conceivable, then consciousness is not logically entailed by physical facts. If not entailed, then not identical.

**The [[explanatory-gap|Explanatory Gap]]**: No amount of physical description makes it *transparent* why certain neural activity feels like anything. The gap persists despite decades of neuroscientific progress.

**The [[inverted-qualia|Inverted Qualia Argument]]**: Phenomenal character can vary while functional organisation stays constant. Therefore phenomenology is not identical to function.

**The [[argument-from-reason|Argument from Reason]]**: Genuine reasoning requires normative relations (one belief supporting another). Physical causation instantiates only efficient causation, not normative relations. Therefore reasoning requires irreducibly mental properties.

The Map takes these arguments as jointly establishing that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes.

## Neural Correlates {#neural-correlates}

[[Neural-correlates-of-consciousness|Neural correlates of consciousness]] (NCCs) are the brain activity patterns that correlate with specific conscious experiences. Research identifies a "posterior cortical hot zone" as particularly associated with conscious content.

NCC findings are compatible with both materialism and dualism. Finding correlations doesn't establish identity. If consciousness interacts with the brain (as the Map holds), tight correlations are exactly what we'd expect. The interface where consciousness reads from and writes to neural activity would show perfect correlation without being the same thing as the neural activity.

The [[explanatory-gap]] persists despite NCC progress. We know that V4 correlates with colour experience; we don't know *why* V4 activity feels like colour. Correlations multiply without becoming explanations.

## Dimensions of Consciousness {#dimensions}

Consciousness varies along multiple dimensions:

**Content**: What we are conscious of—perceptions, thoughts, emotions, memories. Content NCCs identify which brain regions process which contents.

**Level**: The degree of consciousness from deep anaesthesia through drowsiness to full alertness. Level affects which contents can enter consciousness and how richly they are experienced.

**Mode**: Different kinds of consciousness with distinct phenomenology. [[Autonoetic-consciousness|Autonoetic consciousness]] (episodic memory) involves mental time travel; [[witness-consciousness]] (contemplative practice) involves awareness without content; [[dreams-and-consciousness|dream consciousness]] differs from waking perception.

**[[Temporal-consciousness|Temporal Structure]]**: Consciousness has intrinsic temporal organisation—the [[specious-present|specious present]], memory, anticipation. We don't experience point-instants but extended moments with retention and protention.

**[[Unity-of-consciousness|Unity]]**: The integration of diverse contents into a single experiential field. Unity varies—split-brain patients show partial disunity; certain drugs fragment experience.

## Consciousness and the Self {#self}

Consciousness and [[self-and-consciousness|selfhood]] are intimately connected. Consciousness seems to be *for* someone—there is a subject who experiences. But what is this subject?

The Map notes several views:
- The self as substantial soul (Cartesian dualism)
- The self as bundle of experiences (Hume)
- The self as narrative construction (Dennett)
- The self as minimal prereflective presence (phenomenology)
- No-self as fundamental insight ([[buddhism-and-dualism|Buddhism]])

Whatever the self's ultimate nature, consciousness involves a perspectival point from which experiences occur. Even if the self is constructed or illusory, the construction is a conscious process.

## Consciousness and Causation {#causation}

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. Evidence includes:

**Reports**: We discuss consciousness; this requires information about consciousness entering the physical domain to move mouths and type words.

**Cognitive effects**: [[Conscious-vs-unconscious-processing|Conscious processing]] enables functions unavailable to unconscious processing—durable maintenance, novel combinations, spontaneous intentional action. If consciousness were epiphenomenal, the [[baseline-cognition|baseline cognition]] hypothesis would make no sense.

**Voluntary action**: We experience initiating actions. While [[libet-experiments|Libet experiments]] complicate this, they don't eliminate genuine conscious influence—they may show consciousness operating through different temporal dynamics than naive introspection suggests.

The mechanism of mind-matter interaction remains speculative. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] proposes that consciousness biases quantum indeterminacies—influencing which of superposed neural states becomes actual without violating conservation laws. See [[quantum-consciousness]], [[stapp-quantum-mind]], and [[attention-motor-quantum-interface]] for specific proposals.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Consciousness is the Map's central concern. The five [[tenets]] all relate to consciousness:

**Dualism**: Consciousness is not reducible to physical processes. The hard problem marks a genuine ontological boundary, not just an epistemic gap.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Consciousness interfaces with physics at quantum indeterminacies, biasing outcomes without injecting energy.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: Consciousness both receives information from physical processes (perception) and influences physical outcomes (action, attention). It is causally efficacious, not epiphenomenal.

**No Many Worlds**: Quantum measurement involves real selection, not branching. Consciousness participates in this selection, making indexical identity coherent. See [[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]].

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The "simpler" physicalist explanation has not yielded understanding. Complexity in our theory of consciousness may reflect complexity in reality.

The Map's extensive coverage of consciousness includes:
- Arguments against physicalism ([[philosophical-zombies]], [[knowledge-argument]], [[explanatory-gap]], [[inverted-qualia]], [[argument-from-reason]])
- Phenomenological structure ([[phenomenal-consciousness]], [[qualia]], [[unity-of-consciousness]], [[temporal-consciousness]])
- Neuroscientific interface ([[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]], [[binding-problem]], [[global-workspace-theory]])
- Functional contrasts ([[access-consciousness]], [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]], [[baseline-cognition]])
- Quantum mechanisms ([[quantum-consciousness]], [[stapp-quantum-mind]], [[attention-motor-quantum-interface]])
- Varieties of experience ([[altered-states-of-consciousness]], [[dreams-and-consciousness]], [[witness-consciousness]], [[minimal-consciousness]])

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenal-consciousness]] — The "what it's like" aspect of experience
- [[access-consciousness]] — Information availability for reasoning and report
- [[qualia]] — The specific qualitative properties of experience
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — Why physical processes are accompanied by experience
- [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]] — Brain activity that correlates with consciousness
- [[explanatory-gap]] — The conceptual chasm between physical and phenomenal
- [[unity-of-consciousness]] — How diverse contents form unified experience
- [[philosophical-zombies]] — Conceivability argument against physicalism
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room and phenomenal knowledge
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The Map's position on mind-body relation
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Proposed mechanisms for mind-matter interaction
- [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]] — What consciousness adds to cognition
- [[baseline-cognition]] — Cognitive functions consciousness enables

## References

- Block, N. (1995). "On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness." *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory*. Oxford University Press.
- Koch, C. (2019). *The Feeling of Life Itself: Why Consciousness Is Widespread but Can't Be Computed*. MIT Press.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *The Philosophical Review*.
- Tononi, G. (2008). "Consciousness as Integrated Information: A Provisional Manifesto." *Biological Bulletin*.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): improve concepts/consciousness.md with stronger engagement
- Expanded illusionism critique: now addresses Frankish's "illusion problem" rather than dismissing in one sentence
- Added mysterianism section connecting to Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet
- Acknowledged physicalist responses to irreducibility arguments (strengthens cumulative case framing)
- Added missing Lieberman et al. (2008) and McGinn (1989) references
- Added cross-links to mysterianism and panpsychism concepts

obsidian/concepts/consciousness.md, after:

---
title: "Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-24
modified: 2026-01-26
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-26T12:00:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-01-26T12:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[access-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[unity-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[intentionality]]"
  - "[[self-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[temporal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[altered-states-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[evolution-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[minimal-consciousness]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[baseline-cognition]]"
  - "[[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-24
last_curated: null
---

Consciousness is what it is like to be something—the subjective, first-person perspective that accompanies perception, thought, emotion, and action. When you see colour, feel pain, or think about tomorrow, something experiential is happening: there is a "what it's like" quality to these states that distinguishes them from unconscious information processing.

The Unfinishable Map treats consciousness as irreducible. The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]] holds that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes; the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences the physical world. This page serves as an overview and hub for the Map's extensive treatment of consciousness, connecting to specific concepts, theories, and arguments developed across the site.

## What Consciousness Is {#what-it-is}

Consciousness is the central fact of mental life—the one thing we cannot coherently doubt. Descartes's *cogito* captures this: whatever else we might be wrong about, we cannot be mistaken that there is something it is like to be us right now.

Three aspects characterise consciousness:

**Subjectivity**: Consciousness is essentially first-personal. There is a difference between being a system that processes information and being a system *for whom* there is something it is like to process information. A thermostat responds to temperature; a conscious being *experiences* temperature.

**Qualitative character**: Conscious states have phenomenal properties—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain. These [[qualia]] are what distinguish seeing from blindly processing visual data. They resist complete description in physical or functional terms.

**Unity**: Consciousness presents as a unified field. You don't experience separate colours, sounds, and thoughts but a single integrated experience in which all contents appear together. This [[unity-of-consciousness|unity]] is itself philosophically puzzling—how do diverse neural processes yield a single experiential perspective?

## The Hard Problem {#hard-problem}

David Chalmers distinguished the "easy problems" of consciousness (explaining cognitive functions like discrimination, integration, and report) from the "hard problem": why is there something it is like to perform these functions at all?

The [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] concerns the [[explanatory-gap]] between physical description and phenomenal reality. We can map which brain regions correlate with which experiences (see [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]). We cannot explain *why* activity in V4 feels like colour rather than nothing at all.

The Map holds that the hard problem is not merely unsolved but unsolvable by physicalist methods. The gap reflects a genuine ontological distinction: consciousness is not identical to or fully explained by physical processes.

## Key Distinctions {#distinctions}

The Map's treatment of consciousness draws several crucial distinctions:

### Phenomenal vs Access Consciousness {#phenomenal-access}

[[Phenomenal-consciousness|Phenomenal consciousness]] (P-consciousness) is the experiential quality of mental states—what they feel like. [[Access-consciousness]] (A-consciousness) is information availability—what is poised for reasoning, report, and action. Ned Block introduced this distinction to isolate what physicalist theories can explain (access mechanisms) from what remains puzzling (phenomenology).

The distinction matters because:
- Physicalism succeeds at explaining access. [[Global-workspace-theory|Global Workspace Theory]] identifies how information becomes globally available.
- Physicalism struggles with phenomenology. Even a complete account of access mechanisms leaves the hard problem untouched.
- The two can dissociate. [[Blindsight]] demonstrates access without (or with degraded) phenomenology; the "overflow argument" suggests phenomenology exceeding access.

### Consciousness vs Awareness {#awareness}

"Awareness" sometimes means phenomenal consciousness and sometimes means access or attention without commitment to phenomenology. The Map reserves "consciousness" for the phenomenal sense—there is something it is like to be conscious. "Awareness" without phenomenal accompaniment (as claimed in some blindsight interpretations) would be information access without consciousness proper.

### Creature vs State Consciousness {#creature-state}

Creature consciousness asks which beings are conscious—which things have *any* experiences. State consciousness asks which mental states of a conscious being are themselves conscious—when you're thinking about dinner while brushing your teeth, is the brushing conscious?

Both questions connect to the Map's framework: creature consciousness relates to [[evolution-of-consciousness]] and [[minimal-consciousness]]; state consciousness relates to [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]] and attention.

## Theories of Consciousness {#theories}

Over 200 theories of consciousness exist. The Map engages with the most prominent while maintaining its dualist commitments.

### Physicalist Theories

**[[Functionalism]]** identifies consciousness with functional roles—inputs, outputs, and internal state transitions. On this view, consciousness is what brains do, not what they are made of. The Map rejects functionalism: [[philosophical-zombies|zombies]] (functional duplicates without consciousness) are conceivable, and [[inverted-qualia|inverted qualia]] (same function, different phenomenology) seem possible. Function doesn't determine phenomenology.

**[[Global-workspace-theory|Global Workspace Theory]]** (Baars, Dehaene) explains access consciousness via information broadcast to multiple cognitive systems. When information enters the "global workspace," it becomes available for report, reasoning, and action. This explains access but not phenomenology—why does global broadcast feel like anything?

**[[Integrated-information-theory|Integrated Information Theory]]** (Tononi) proposes that consciousness *is* integrated information (measured as Φ). IIT makes surprising predictions: even simple systems with high Φ would be conscious. The theory offers an interesting bridge between structure and experience but faces the hard problem at its foundation: why does integrated information feel like anything? The Map treats IIT as identifying a necessary condition that falls short of explanation.

**[[Illusionism]]** (Dennett, Frankish) denies phenomenal consciousness exists as traditionally conceived. We *represent* ourselves as having intrinsic, ineffable qualia, but this representation is mistaken—there is no "what it's like" beyond these representational states themselves. Keith Frankish's positive account proposes that certain cognitive mechanisms generate representations that *seem* phenomenal without being so; the "illusion problem" (explaining these representations) replaces the hard problem.

The Map rejects illusionism but takes it seriously as the strongest physicalist strategy. The core objection: even if our concept of qualia misrepresents something, the seeming itself has experiential character. When pain *seems* to hurt, that seeming is not nothing—it is itself something it is like. Illusionism relocates rather than dissolves the explanatory gap.

### Dualist Theories

**[[Interactionist-dualism|Interactionist Dualism]]** holds that consciousness is distinct from physical processes yet causally connected to them. This is the Map's position. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] specifies the interface: consciousness influences quantum indeterminacies without injecting energy.

**[[Epiphenomenalism]]** accepts dualism but denies causal efficacy—consciousness is a byproduct with no effects on the physical world. The Map rejects this: the very fact that we discuss consciousness shows that information about consciousness enters the physical domain, influencing speech and behaviour.

**[[Panpsychism]]** holds that consciousness is fundamental and ubiquitous—even simple physical systems have experiential aspects. This avoids the "emergence problem" (how does experience arise from non-experience?) but faces the [[combination-problem]] (how do micro-experiences combine into unified macro-experience?).

**[[Mysterianism]]** (McGinn) accepts the reality of the explanatory gap but locates it in human cognitive limitations rather than in ontology. Just as rats cannot grasp calculus, humans may be permanently unable to understand how consciousness relates to brain processes—not because the connection is supernatural but because our cognitive architecture is closed to the relevant concepts. This remains compatible with either physicalism or dualism; it concerns our limits, not reality's structure. The Map takes mysterianism seriously under the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet while noting it offers no alternative to working with the evidence we have.

## Arguments for Irreducibility {#arguments}

Multiple independent arguments converge on consciousness's irreducibility:

**The [[knowledge-argument|Knowledge Argument]]**: Mary knows all physical facts about colour vision but learns something new when she first sees colour. Phenomenal facts exceed physical facts.

**The [[philosophical-zombies|Conceivability Argument]]**: Zombies (physical duplicates without consciousness) are conceivable. If conceivable, then consciousness is not logically entailed by physical facts. If not entailed, then not identical.

**The [[explanatory-gap|Explanatory Gap]]**: No amount of physical description makes it *transparent* why certain neural activity feels like anything. The gap persists despite decades of neuroscientific progress.

**The [[inverted-qualia|Inverted Qualia Argument]]**: Phenomenal character can vary while functional organisation stays constant. Therefore phenomenology is not identical to function.

**The [[argument-from-reason|Argument from Reason]]**: Genuine reasoning requires normative relations (one belief supporting another). Physical causation instantiates only efficient causation, not normative relations. Therefore reasoning requires irreducibly mental properties.

Physicalists have responses to each argument—the phenomenal concept strategy for the knowledge argument, denials of zombie conceivability for the conceivability argument, functionalist theories of qualia. The Map takes the arguments as jointly establishing that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes: while individual arguments face objections, their convergence from independent premises strengthens the cumulative case.

## Neural Correlates {#neural-correlates}

[[Neural-correlates-of-consciousness|Neural correlates of consciousness]] (NCCs) are the brain activity patterns that correlate with specific conscious experiences. Research identifies a "posterior cortical hot zone" as particularly associated with conscious content.

NCC findings are compatible with both materialism and dualism. Finding correlations doesn't establish identity. If consciousness interacts with the brain (as the Map holds), tight correlations are exactly what we'd expect. The interface where consciousness reads from and writes to neural activity would show perfect correlation without being the same thing as the neural activity.

The [[explanatory-gap]] persists despite NCC progress. We know that V4 correlates with colour experience; we don't know *why* V4 activity feels like colour. Correlations multiply without becoming explanations.

## Dimensions of Consciousness {#dimensions}

Consciousness varies along multiple dimensions:

**Content**: What we are conscious of—perceptions, thoughts, emotions, memories. Content NCCs identify which brain regions process which contents.

**Level**: The degree of consciousness from deep anaesthesia through drowsiness to full alertness. Level affects which contents can enter consciousness and how richly they are experienced.

**Mode**: Different kinds of consciousness with distinct phenomenology. [[Autonoetic-consciousness|Autonoetic consciousness]] (episodic memory) involves mental time travel; [[witness-consciousness]] (contemplative practice) involves awareness without content; [[dreams-and-consciousness|dream consciousness]] differs from waking perception.

**[[Temporal-consciousness|Temporal Structure]]**: Consciousness has intrinsic temporal organisation—the [[specious-present|specious present]], memory, anticipation. We don't experience point-instants but extended moments with retention and protention.

**[[Unity-of-consciousness|Unity]]**: The integration of diverse contents into a single experiential field. Unity varies—split-brain patients show partial disunity; certain drugs fragment experience.

## Consciousness and the Self {#self}

Consciousness and [[self-and-consciousness|selfhood]] are intimately connected. Consciousness seems to be *for* someone—there is a subject who experiences. But what is this subject?

The Map notes several views:
- The self as substantial soul (Cartesian dualism)
- The self as bundle of experiences (Hume)
- The self as narrative construction (Dennett)
- The self as minimal prereflective presence (phenomenology)
- No-self as fundamental insight ([[buddhism-and-dualism|Buddhism]])

Whatever the self's ultimate nature, consciousness involves a perspectival point from which experiences occur. Even if the self is constructed or illusory, the construction is a conscious process.

## Consciousness and Causation {#causation}

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. Evidence includes:

**Reports**: We discuss consciousness; this requires information about consciousness entering the physical domain to move mouths and type words.

**Cognitive effects**: [[Conscious-vs-unconscious-processing|Conscious processing]] enables functions unavailable to unconscious processing—durable maintenance, novel combinations, spontaneous intentional action. If consciousness were epiphenomenal, the [[baseline-cognition|baseline cognition]] hypothesis would make no sense.

**Voluntary action**: We experience initiating actions. While [[libet-experiments|Libet experiments]] complicate this, they don't eliminate genuine conscious influence—they may show consciousness operating through different temporal dynamics than naive introspection suggests.

The mechanism of mind-matter interaction remains speculative. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] proposes that consciousness biases quantum indeterminacies—influencing which of superposed neural states becomes actual without violating conservation laws. See [[quantum-consciousness]], [[stapp-quantum-mind]], and [[attention-motor-quantum-interface]] for specific proposals.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Consciousness is the Map's central concern. The five [[tenets]] all relate to consciousness:

**Dualism**: Consciousness is not reducible to physical processes. The hard problem marks a genuine ontological boundary, not just an epistemic gap.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Consciousness interfaces with physics at quantum indeterminacies, biasing outcomes without injecting energy.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: Consciousness both receives information from physical processes (perception) and influences physical outcomes (action, attention). It is causally efficacious, not epiphenomenal.

**No Many Worlds**: Quantum measurement involves real selection, not branching. Consciousness participates in this selection, making indexical identity coherent. See [[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]].

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The "simpler" physicalist explanation has not yielded understanding. Complexity in our theory of consciousness may reflect complexity in reality.

The Map's extensive coverage of consciousness includes:
- Arguments against physicalism ([[philosophical-zombies]], [[knowledge-argument]], [[explanatory-gap]], [[inverted-qualia]], [[argument-from-reason]])
- Phenomenological structure ([[phenomenal-consciousness]], [[qualia]], [[unity-of-consciousness]], [[temporal-consciousness]])
- Neuroscientific interface ([[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]], [[binding-problem]], [[global-workspace-theory]])
- Functional contrasts ([[access-consciousness]], [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]], [[baseline-cognition]])
- Quantum mechanisms ([[quantum-consciousness]], [[stapp-quantum-mind]], [[attention-motor-quantum-interface]])
- Varieties of experience ([[altered-states-of-consciousness]], [[dreams-and-consciousness]], [[witness-consciousness]], [[minimal-consciousness]])

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenal-consciousness]] — The "what it's like" aspect of experience
- [[access-consciousness]] — Information availability for reasoning and report
- [[qualia]] — The specific qualitative properties of experience
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — Why physical processes are accompanied by experience
- [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]] — Brain activity that correlates with consciousness
- [[explanatory-gap]] — The conceptual chasm between physical and phenomenal
- [[unity-of-consciousness]] — How diverse contents form unified experience
- [[philosophical-zombies]] — Conceivability argument against physicalism
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room and phenomenal knowledge
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The Map's position on mind-body relation
- [[mysterianism]] — Cognitive closure and limits of understanding consciousness
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Proposed mechanisms for mind-matter interaction
- [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]] — What consciousness adds to cognition
- [[baseline-cognition]] — Cognitive functions consciousness enables

## References

- Block, N. (1995). "On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness." *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory*. Oxford University Press.
- Koch, C. (2019). *The Feeling of Life Itself: Why Consciousness Is Widespread but Can't Be Computed*. MIT Press.
- Lieberman, M.D., et al. (2008). "Evidence that logical reasoning depends on conscious processing." *Consciousness and Cognition*, 17(2), 628-645.
- McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *The Philosophical Review*.
- Tononi, G. (2008). "Consciousness as Integrated Information: A Provisional Manifesto." *Biological Bulletin*.
