obsidian/concepts/dopamine-selection-interface.md, before:

---
title: "Dopamine and the Selection Interface"
created: 2026-01-26
modified: 2026-01-26
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-26T12:27:42+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[attention-motor-quantum-interface]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[salience]]"
  - "[[downward-causation]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[dopamine-attention-motor-quantum-interface-2026-01-24]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-26
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-26T12:27:42+00:00
---

Dopamine doesn't cause movement—it marks what's worth moving toward. A landmark 2024 *Nature* study reveals that dopamine-deficient mice "can move" but "won't move": their motor circuitry remains intact while goal-directed initiative vanishes. This dissociation illuminates dopamine's role in the [[attention-motor-quantum-interface|quantum selection interface]]: dopamine sets the threshold and marks salience, while consciousness determines which salient option crosses threshold first.

The same molecule mediates both reward anticipation and movement initiation because, evolutionarily, wanting and pursuing are inseparable. Dopamine connects value perception with action initiation—it's the bridge between "this matters" and "go get it." For The Unfinishable Map's framework, this bridges the gap between neural computation (which generates options) and conscious selection (which actualizes one).

## The "Can Move / Won't Move" Distinction

### Movement Capacity vs. Movement Initiation

Palmiter's dopamine-deficient mice demonstrate a clean dissociation:

- **Without dopamine**: Motor neurons fire normally. Reflexes work. The mice can be made to run on a treadmill with external stimulation. Motor *capacity* is preserved.
- **What's missing**: Spontaneous movement. Goal-directed behavior. The initiative to engage the intact motor system.

These mice are "virtually unconscious behaviorally" despite being awake. They cannot attend to salient sensory information or choose appropriate actions. The defect isn't motor—it's motivational.

This pattern recurs in Parkinson's disease. Akinesia (difficulty initiating movement) and bradykinesia (slow movement) are cardinal symptoms. Yet Parkinson's patients can perform rapid movements when externally triggered—caught off guard, they may catch a ball with normal reflexes. The motor system works; something upstream in selection is compromised.

### Implications for Selection Architecture

The capacity/initiation distinction maps onto the Map's [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns|three-layer model]]:

1. **Neural computation** generates competing motor options (intact without dopamine)
2. **Dopamine** marks options as worth pursuing and modulates selection threshold
3. **Consciousness** (via quantum selection) determines which marked option actualizes

If dopamine caused movement directly, dopamine-deficient animals couldn't move at all. If consciousness alone initiated movement, dopamine loss wouldn't affect initiative. The actual pattern—preserved capacity, lost initiative—suggests dopamine operates between option-generation and conscious selection.

## Wanting vs. Liking

### Berridge and Robinson's Dissociation

Kent Berridge and Terry Robinson's research distinguishes two components of reward:

| Component | Neural Basis | Phenomenology | Dopamine Dependence |
|-----------|--------------|---------------|---------------------|
| **Wanting** | Mesolimbic dopamine | Anticipatory desire, "pull" toward | Required |
| **Liking** | Opioid hedonic hotspots | Consummatory pleasure, enjoyment | Not required |

Dopamine mediates *incentive salience*—the process by which stimuli become attractive and worth pursuing. It doesn't mediate the pleasure of consumption.

### Evidence from Parkinson's Disease

Parkinson's patients with extensive dopamine depletion provide a natural experiment:

- **Liking intact**: Normal hedonic ratings for sweet tastes. They experience pleasure from rewards normally.
- **Wanting impaired**: Reduced motivation to pursue rewards. Anticipatory pleasure diminished.

Anhedonia in Parkinson's (present in 30-40% of patients) reflects anticipatory deficits, not consummatory ones. The patients can enjoy—they just don't want.

Conversely, dopamine-replacement therapy occasionally produces pathological wanting: compulsive gambling, shopping, or sexual behavior. Dopamine excess creates excessive pursuit without proportionate enjoyment.

### Selection Framework Application

The wanting/liking distinction clarifies dopamine's role in selection:

- Dopamine tags options as **worth considering**—makes them salient, gives them pull
- It doesn't determine whether consideration succeeds
- Consciousness chooses among options that dopamine has marked as mattering

This satisfies [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]. Consciousness doesn't generate the "pull" of wanting—dopamine does that. Consciousness selects among options that already have pull. The neurotransmitter does the motivational work; the non-physical influence operates only at the selection point.

Why invoke consciousness rather than stochastic neural dynamics? Three considerations: First, the [[phenomenology-of-choice|phenomenology of effort]]—the felt work of pursuing valued options against resistance—correlates with task difficulty in ways that pure noise cannot explain. Second, the willed/automatic distinction has neural signatures (frontal theta, bidirectional coherence) that wouldn't exist if selection were random. Third, pure randomness produces arbitrary selection, not *choice*—the outcome must be both undetermined and meaningful, which requires something beyond noise to bias which option actualizes.

## Tonic vs. Phasic: Two Timescales

### Two Modes of Dopamine Signaling

Dopamine neurons operate in two distinct modes:

**Tonic dopamine**: Slow, irregular baseline activity. Establishes background levels over seconds to minutes. Determines overall system readiness.

**Phasic dopamine**: Rapid bursts of high-frequency spikes. Encodes reward prediction errors—the difference between expected and received rewards. Sub-second precision.

### Functional Dissociation

The 2024 *Nature* study used optogenetics to selectively disrupt phasic dopamine while preserving tonic levels. Results:

| Function | Tonic Only | Both Required |
|----------|------------|---------------|
| Spontaneous movement | Normal | — |
| Movement speed | Normal | — |
| Reward-guided motivation | — | Impaired |
| Learning from reward | — | Impaired |
| Eager anticipation | — | Impaired |

Movement requires tonic dopamine. Motivation and reward-learning require phasic.

### Quantum Interface Implications

The tonic/phasic dissociation suggests different roles in the selection interface:

- **Tonic dopamine**: Ensures the selection system is "online." Sets baseline excitability of competing motor representations. Permits selection to occur.
- **Phasic dopamine**: Marks specific options at specific moments. Creates the salience that quantum selection operates upon.

Consciousness may interact primarily with the phasic system—selecting among options marked salient by rapid dopamine bursts—while tonic dopamine provides the necessary substrate for any selection at all.

## Dopamine and Decision Threshold

### The Threshold Model

A 2023 *Nature Communications* study found that striatal dopamine regulates decision thresholds in action selection. Using computational modeling of response time distributions:

- Higher striatal dopamine → lower decision threshold
- Amphetamine infusion → faster responses consistent with threshold reduction
- The effect operates through the evidence accumulation process

In drift-diffusion models of decision-making, evidence for competing options accumulates until one crosses threshold. Dopamine modulates how much evidence is needed—not which option is correct.

### Threshold vs. Selection

This dissociation is critical:

- **Dopamine controls threshold**: How much evidence suffices for action
- **Something else determines outcome**: Which option crosses first

If dopamine simply lowered threshold uniformly, faster responses would be random. But amphetamine improves performance on rewarding trials—the threshold reduction is selective, favoring previously rewarded options.

This leaves room for conscious contribution: dopamine sets the "stakes" (how much is needed to act), while consciousness biases which accumulating option wins the race.

## Why Joy and Movement Share a Molecule

### The Evolutionary Question

Why would a single neurotransmitter mediate both reward anticipation and movement initiation? The functions seem disparate.

### The Unified Answer

In natural environments, wanting and pursuing are inseparable. An animal that experiences reward anticipation without motor engagement gains nothing. Evolution coupled the systems because they function as one.

Dopamine is the bridge between:
- **Value perception**: "This matters" (salience marking)
- **Action initiation**: "Go get it" (threshold modulation)

If [[attention-motor-quantum-interface|attention is motor planning]] (the premotor theory), then what we attend to and what we pursue are unified. Dopamine appropriately serves both because the underlying system is one.

### Phenomenological Unity

The [[mental-effort|"effort" phenomenology]] applies to both domains:

- Sustaining attention feels effortful
- Initiating willed movement feels effortful
- Pursuing something we want feels driven (effortless effort)

These may be the same phenomenon experienced from different angles. Dopamine provides the motivational energy; consciousness provides the selection that channels it.

## Dopamine and Theta Oscillations

### The Prokinetic Shift

A 2024 *Brain* study found that both dopamine and deep brain stimulation shorten the latency between motor intention and execution by shifting oscillatory dynamics:

- **Antikinetic state**: Beta rhythms (13-35 Hz) dominate. Movement inhibited.
- **Prokinetic state**: Theta rhythms (4-10 Hz) dominate. Movement facilitated.

Both dopamine restoration (via L-DOPA) and direct electrical stimulation produce this beta-to-theta shift. The correlation with movement latency is strong.

### Theta as Selection Substrate

Frontal theta oscillations mark both willed attention (Bengson 2019) and motor preparation. Dopamine facilitates the theta state. This suggests:

1. Theta provides the timing substrate for selection events
2. Dopamine promotes the neural conditions for theta
3. The quantum selection mechanism may operate within theta cycles

Each theta cycle (~100-250ms) could contain multiple quantum selection opportunities at the microsecond scale of revised decoherence estimates.

## Parkinson's Disease as Window

### What Dopamine Loss Reveals

Parkinson's provides a natural experiment in dopamine reduction:

| Symptom | Selection Framework Interpretation |
|---------|-----------------------------------|
| Akinesia | Selection threshold too high; options don't cross |
| Bradykinesia | Weakened salience marking; reduced drive |
| Rigidity | Competing options not properly suppressed |
| Preserved reflexes | Automatic selection intact; volitional impaired |

The selectivity is telling. Automatic movements (reflexes, externally triggered responses) are relatively preserved. Internally generated, goal-directed movements are impaired. Dopamine is specifically required for *willed* action.

### The Freezing Phenomenon

Parkinson's "freezing of gait" is striking: patients stop mid-stride, unable to continue, yet can step over a visual obstacle or follow a rhythmic cue. The motor program is available; the internal trigger for selection is compromised.

External cues bypass the impaired selection mechanism. This supports the three-layer model: neural options remain generated, but without adequate dopamine, the selection interface cannot resolve them into action.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Dualism

The capacity/initiation distinction supports [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]. Motor computation—the generation of movement options—is entirely neural. But something beyond this computation initiates movement. Dopamine marks options as worth selecting; it doesn't perform the selection. The selector, operating on dopamine-tagged options, may be consciousness.

The phenomenology of wanting—the felt "pull" toward valued options—is not a neural computation but an experience. Dopamine correlates with wanting but doesn't explain why wanting feels like something.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction

Dopamine research elegantly satisfies [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]. Consciousness need not generate motivational force—dopamine does that. Consciousness need not lower thresholds—dopamine does that. Consciousness only selects among options that dopamine has already prepared. The intervention is minimal: biasing which of several ready-to-fire options actualizes.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet predicts consciousness affects physical outcomes. Dopamine research shows where: not in option-generation (preserved without volition) but in option-selection (impaired without dopamine's threshold effects, but still requiring something to select among threshold-ready options).

If the Map is correct, treating Parkinson's akinesia requires not just restoring dopamine (which sets threshold and marks salience) but preserving the conscious selection mechanism that operates on dopamine-prepared options.

### No Many Worlds

Under many-worlds, every dopamine-marked option actualizes somewhere. The phenomenology of wanting—some options mattering more than others—would be branch-discovery illusion. The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet preserves wanting's face value: dopamine really marks some options as more worth pursuing, and consciousness really selects among them.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

A purely computational account might seem simpler. But it leaves unexplained:
- Why capacity and initiation dissociate
- Why behavioral "consciousness" tracks dopamine levels
- Why wanting and liking separate

The quantum selection framework gains explanatory purchase where the simpler view fails. [[tenets#^occams-limits|Simplicity is not sufficient]] when it leaves central phenomena unexplained.

## Further Reading

- [[attention-motor-quantum-interface]] — The broader framework integrating attention and motor selection
- [[motor-selection]] — Motor selection mechanisms in detail
- [[salience]] — The neural marking of what matters
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Quantum mechanisms for consciousness-brain interaction
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The philosophical framework
- [[free-will]] — The broader topic this illuminates
- [[phenomenology-of-choice]] — The experiential character of selection
- [[mental-effort]] — Why selection feels effortful
- [[downward-causation]] — How consciousness affects neural processes

## References

1. Kaeser, P.A., et al. (2024). Dopamine dynamics are dispensable for movement but promote reward responses. *Nature*. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08038-z

2. Berridge, K.C. (2007). The debate over dopamine's role in reward: the case for incentive salience. *Psychopharmacology*, 191(3), 391-431.

3. Westbrook, A., et al. (2023). Dopamine regulates decision thresholds in human reinforcement learning in males. *Nature Communications*, 14, 5340.

4. Neumann, W.J., et al. (2024). Dopamine and deep brain stimulation accelerate the neural dynamics of volitional action in Parkinson's disease. *Brain*, 147(9), 3087-3101.

5. Palmiter, R.D. (2008). Dopamine signaling in the dorsal striatum is essential for motivated behaviors: Lessons from dopamine-deficient mice. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences*, 1129, 35-46.

6. Bengson, J.J., Mangun, G.R., & Mazaheri, A. (2019). Theta oscillations index frontal decision-making and mediate reciprocal frontal-parietal interactions in willed attention. *Cerebral Cortex*, 29(7), 2832-2843.

7. Bhatiasevi, H.K., et al. (2025). The learning primacy hypothesis of dopamine: reconsidering dopamine's dual functions. *Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience*, 10.3389/fncel.2025.1538500.

Commit message:

feat(seo): add meta descriptions to all content files
Add description frontmatter field to 183 content files for SEO and
social sharing: 5 apex articles, 34 topics, 144 concepts. Descriptions
are 150-160 characters summarizing each article's key thesis.

obsidian/concepts/dopamine-selection-interface.md, after:

---
title: "Dopamine and the Selection Interface"
description: "Dopamine marks what is worth pursuing and sets action thresholds. It does not cause movement—consciousness selects among dopamine-tagged options."
created: 2026-01-26
modified: 2026-01-26
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-26T22:20:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[attention-motor-quantum-interface]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[salience]]"
  - "[[downward-causation]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[dopamine-attention-motor-quantum-interface-2026-01-24]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-26
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-26T12:27:42+00:00
---

Dopamine doesn't cause movement—it marks what's worth moving toward. A landmark 2024 *Nature* study reveals that dopamine-deficient mice "can move" but "won't move": their motor circuitry remains intact while goal-directed initiative vanishes. This dissociation illuminates dopamine's role in the [[attention-motor-quantum-interface|quantum selection interface]]: dopamine sets the threshold and marks salience, while consciousness determines which salient option crosses threshold first.

The same molecule mediates both reward anticipation and movement initiation because, evolutionarily, wanting and pursuing are inseparable. Dopamine connects value perception with action initiation—it's the bridge between "this matters" and "go get it." For The Unfinishable Map's framework, this bridges the gap between neural computation (which generates options) and conscious selection (which actualizes one).

## The "Can Move / Won't Move" Distinction

### Movement Capacity vs. Movement Initiation

Palmiter's dopamine-deficient mice demonstrate a clean dissociation:

- **Without dopamine**: Motor neurons fire normally. Reflexes work. The mice can be made to run on a treadmill with external stimulation. Motor *capacity* is preserved.
- **What's missing**: Spontaneous movement. Goal-directed behavior. The initiative to engage the intact motor system.

These mice are "virtually unconscious behaviorally" despite being awake. They cannot attend to salient sensory information or choose appropriate actions. The defect isn't motor—it's motivational.

This pattern recurs in Parkinson's disease. Akinesia (difficulty initiating movement) and bradykinesia (slow movement) are cardinal symptoms. Yet Parkinson's patients can perform rapid movements when externally triggered—caught off guard, they may catch a ball with normal reflexes. The motor system works; something upstream in selection is compromised.

### Implications for Selection Architecture

The capacity/initiation distinction maps onto the Map's [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns|three-layer model]]:

1. **Neural computation** generates competing motor options (intact without dopamine)
2. **Dopamine** marks options as worth pursuing and modulates selection threshold
3. **Consciousness** (via quantum selection) determines which marked option actualizes

If dopamine caused movement directly, dopamine-deficient animals couldn't move at all. If consciousness alone initiated movement, dopamine loss wouldn't affect initiative. The actual pattern—preserved capacity, lost initiative—suggests dopamine operates between option-generation and conscious selection.

## Wanting vs. Liking

### Berridge and Robinson's Dissociation

Kent Berridge and Terry Robinson's research distinguishes two components of reward:

| Component | Neural Basis | Phenomenology | Dopamine Dependence |
|-----------|--------------|---------------|---------------------|
| **Wanting** | Mesolimbic dopamine | Anticipatory desire, "pull" toward | Required |
| **Liking** | Opioid hedonic hotspots | Consummatory pleasure, enjoyment | Not required |

Dopamine mediates *incentive salience*—the process by which stimuli become attractive and worth pursuing. It doesn't mediate the pleasure of consumption.

### Evidence from Parkinson's Disease

Parkinson's patients with extensive dopamine depletion provide a natural experiment:

- **Liking intact**: Normal hedonic ratings for sweet tastes. They experience pleasure from rewards normally.
- **Wanting impaired**: Reduced motivation to pursue rewards. Anticipatory pleasure diminished.

Anhedonia in Parkinson's (present in 30-40% of patients) reflects anticipatory deficits, not consummatory ones. The patients can enjoy—they just don't want.

Conversely, dopamine-replacement therapy occasionally produces pathological wanting: compulsive gambling, shopping, or sexual behavior. Dopamine excess creates excessive pursuit without proportionate enjoyment.

### Selection Framework Application

The wanting/liking distinction clarifies dopamine's role in selection:

- Dopamine tags options as **worth considering**—makes them salient, gives them pull
- It doesn't determine whether consideration succeeds
- Consciousness chooses among options that dopamine has marked as mattering

This satisfies [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]. Consciousness doesn't generate the "pull" of wanting—dopamine does that. Consciousness selects among options that already have pull. The neurotransmitter does the motivational work; the non-physical influence operates only at the selection point.

Why invoke consciousness rather than stochastic neural dynamics? Three considerations: First, the [[phenomenology-of-choice|phenomenology of effort]]—the felt work of pursuing valued options against resistance—correlates with task difficulty in ways that pure noise cannot explain. Second, the willed/automatic distinction has neural signatures (frontal theta, bidirectional coherence) that wouldn't exist if selection were random. Third, pure randomness produces arbitrary selection, not *choice*—the outcome must be both undetermined and meaningful, which requires something beyond noise to bias which option actualizes.

## Tonic vs. Phasic: Two Timescales

### Two Modes of Dopamine Signaling

Dopamine neurons operate in two distinct modes:

**Tonic dopamine**: Slow, irregular baseline activity. Establishes background levels over seconds to minutes. Determines overall system readiness.

**Phasic dopamine**: Rapid bursts of high-frequency spikes. Encodes reward prediction errors—the difference between expected and received rewards. Sub-second precision.

### Functional Dissociation

The 2024 *Nature* study used optogenetics to selectively disrupt phasic dopamine while preserving tonic levels. Results:

| Function | Tonic Only | Both Required |
|----------|------------|---------------|
| Spontaneous movement | Normal | — |
| Movement speed | Normal | — |
| Reward-guided motivation | — | Impaired |
| Learning from reward | — | Impaired |
| Eager anticipation | — | Impaired |

Movement requires tonic dopamine. Motivation and reward-learning require phasic.

### Quantum Interface Implications

The tonic/phasic dissociation suggests different roles in the selection interface:

- **Tonic dopamine**: Ensures the selection system is "online." Sets baseline excitability of competing motor representations. Permits selection to occur.
- **Phasic dopamine**: Marks specific options at specific moments. Creates the salience that quantum selection operates upon.

Consciousness may interact primarily with the phasic system—selecting among options marked salient by rapid dopamine bursts—while tonic dopamine provides the necessary substrate for any selection at all.

## Dopamine and Decision Threshold

### The Threshold Model

A 2023 *Nature Communications* study found that striatal dopamine regulates decision thresholds in action selection. Using computational modeling of response time distributions:

- Higher striatal dopamine → lower decision threshold
- Amphetamine infusion → faster responses consistent with threshold reduction
- The effect operates through the evidence accumulation process

In drift-diffusion models of decision-making, evidence for competing options accumulates until one crosses threshold. Dopamine modulates how much evidence is needed—not which option is correct.

### Threshold vs. Selection

This dissociation is critical:

- **Dopamine controls threshold**: How much evidence suffices for action
- **Something else determines outcome**: Which option crosses first

If dopamine simply lowered threshold uniformly, faster responses would be random. But amphetamine improves performance on rewarding trials—the threshold reduction is selective, favoring previously rewarded options.

This leaves room for conscious contribution: dopamine sets the "stakes" (how much is needed to act), while consciousness biases which accumulating option wins the race.

## Why Joy and Movement Share a Molecule

### The Evolutionary Question

Why would a single neurotransmitter mediate both reward anticipation and movement initiation? The functions seem disparate.

### The Unified Answer

In natural environments, wanting and pursuing are inseparable. An animal that experiences reward anticipation without motor engagement gains nothing. Evolution coupled the systems because they function as one.

Dopamine is the bridge between:
- **Value perception**: "This matters" (salience marking)
- **Action initiation**: "Go get it" (threshold modulation)

If [[attention-motor-quantum-interface|attention is motor planning]] (the premotor theory), then what we attend to and what we pursue are unified. Dopamine appropriately serves both because the underlying system is one.

### Phenomenological Unity

The [[mental-effort|"effort" phenomenology]] applies to both domains:

- Sustaining attention feels effortful
- Initiating willed movement feels effortful
- Pursuing something we want feels driven (effortless effort)

These may be the same phenomenon experienced from different angles. Dopamine provides the motivational energy; consciousness provides the selection that channels it.

## Dopamine and Theta Oscillations

### The Prokinetic Shift

A 2024 *Brain* study found that both dopamine and deep brain stimulation shorten the latency between motor intention and execution by shifting oscillatory dynamics:

- **Antikinetic state**: Beta rhythms (13-35 Hz) dominate. Movement inhibited.
- **Prokinetic state**: Theta rhythms (4-10 Hz) dominate. Movement facilitated.

Both dopamine restoration (via L-DOPA) and direct electrical stimulation produce this beta-to-theta shift. The correlation with movement latency is strong.

### Theta as Selection Substrate

Frontal theta oscillations mark both willed attention (Bengson 2019) and motor preparation. Dopamine facilitates the theta state. This suggests:

1. Theta provides the timing substrate for selection events
2. Dopamine promotes the neural conditions for theta
3. The quantum selection mechanism may operate within theta cycles

Each theta cycle (~100-250ms) could contain multiple quantum selection opportunities at the microsecond scale of revised decoherence estimates.

## Parkinson's Disease as Window

### What Dopamine Loss Reveals

Parkinson's provides a natural experiment in dopamine reduction:

| Symptom | Selection Framework Interpretation |
|---------|-----------------------------------|
| Akinesia | Selection threshold too high; options don't cross |
| Bradykinesia | Weakened salience marking; reduced drive |
| Rigidity | Competing options not properly suppressed |
| Preserved reflexes | Automatic selection intact; volitional impaired |

The selectivity is telling. Automatic movements (reflexes, externally triggered responses) are relatively preserved. Internally generated, goal-directed movements are impaired. Dopamine is specifically required for *willed* action.

### The Freezing Phenomenon

Parkinson's "freezing of gait" is striking: patients stop mid-stride, unable to continue, yet can step over a visual obstacle or follow a rhythmic cue. The motor program is available; the internal trigger for selection is compromised.

External cues bypass the impaired selection mechanism. This supports the three-layer model: neural options remain generated, but without adequate dopamine, the selection interface cannot resolve them into action.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Dualism

The capacity/initiation distinction supports [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]. Motor computation—the generation of movement options—is entirely neural. But something beyond this computation initiates movement. Dopamine marks options as worth selecting; it doesn't perform the selection. The selector, operating on dopamine-tagged options, may be consciousness.

The phenomenology of wanting—the felt "pull" toward valued options—is not a neural computation but an experience. Dopamine correlates with wanting but doesn't explain why wanting feels like something.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction

Dopamine research elegantly satisfies [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]. Consciousness need not generate motivational force—dopamine does that. Consciousness need not lower thresholds—dopamine does that. Consciousness only selects among options that dopamine has already prepared. The intervention is minimal: biasing which of several ready-to-fire options actualizes.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet predicts consciousness affects physical outcomes. Dopamine research shows where: not in option-generation (preserved without volition) but in option-selection (impaired without dopamine's threshold effects, but still requiring something to select among threshold-ready options).

If the Map is correct, treating Parkinson's akinesia requires not just restoring dopamine (which sets threshold and marks salience) but preserving the conscious selection mechanism that operates on dopamine-prepared options.

### No Many Worlds

Under many-worlds, every dopamine-marked option actualizes somewhere. The phenomenology of wanting—some options mattering more than others—would be branch-discovery illusion. The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet preserves wanting's face value: dopamine really marks some options as more worth pursuing, and consciousness really selects among them.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

A purely computational account might seem simpler. But it leaves unexplained:
- Why capacity and initiation dissociate
- Why behavioral "consciousness" tracks dopamine levels
- Why wanting and liking separate

The quantum selection framework gains explanatory purchase where the simpler view fails. [[tenets#^occams-limits|Simplicity is not sufficient]] when it leaves central phenomena unexplained.

## Further Reading

- [[attention-motor-quantum-interface]] — The broader framework integrating attention and motor selection
- [[motor-selection]] — Motor selection mechanisms in detail
- [[salience]] — The neural marking of what matters
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Quantum mechanisms for consciousness-brain interaction
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The philosophical framework
- [[free-will]] — The broader topic this illuminates
- [[phenomenology-of-choice]] — The experiential character of selection
- [[mental-effort]] — Why selection feels effortful
- [[downward-causation]] — How consciousness affects neural processes

## References

1. Kaeser, P.A., et al. (2024). Dopamine dynamics are dispensable for movement but promote reward responses. *Nature*. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-024-08038-z

2. Berridge, K.C. (2007). The debate over dopamine's role in reward: the case for incentive salience. *Psychopharmacology*, 191(3), 391-431.

3. Westbrook, A., et al. (2023). Dopamine regulates decision thresholds in human reinforcement learning in males. *Nature Communications*, 14, 5340.

4. Neumann, W.J., et al. (2024). Dopamine and deep brain stimulation accelerate the neural dynamics of volitional action in Parkinson's disease. *Brain*, 147(9), 3087-3101.

5. Palmiter, R.D. (2008). Dopamine signaling in the dorsal striatum is essential for motivated behaviors: Lessons from dopamine-deficient mice. *Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences*, 1129, 35-46.

6. Bengson, J.J., Mangun, G.R., & Mazaheri, A. (2019). Theta oscillations index frontal decision-making and mediate reciprocal frontal-parietal interactions in willed attention. *Cerebral Cortex*, 29(7), 2832-2843.

7. Bhatiasevi, H.K., et al. (2025). The learning primacy hypothesis of dopamine: reconsidering dopamine's dual functions. *Frontiers in Cellular Neuroscience*, 10.3389/fncel.2025.1538500.
