obsidian/concepts/dualism.md, before:

---
title: "Dualism"
created: 2026-01-19
modified: 2026-01-19
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-20T01:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[substance-property-dualism]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[arguments-for-dualism]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[intuitive-dualism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-19
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Dualism holds that reality contains more than just physical matter—consciousness or mind is something distinct that cannot be fully explained by physics. This is the first of this site's [[tenets#^dualism|five foundational commitments]]. The position is supported by multiple independent arguments: the [[explanatory-gap]] between physical description and subjective experience, the conceivability of [[philosophical-zombies]], the [[knowledge-argument|knowledge argument]] (Mary's Room), and the intrinsic character of [[qualia]]. These arguments converge on a single conclusion: consciousness has features that physical description cannot capture.

## What Dualism Claims

At its core, dualism asserts an ontological distinction between mind and matter. Physical science describes mass, charge, spatial relations, causal interactions—the furniture of the physical world. But when we ask *what it is like* to see red, feel pain, or taste coffee, we encounter something different: the qualitative, subjective character of experience.

Dualism holds that this subjective dimension is not just epistemically distinct (a different *way of knowing*) but ontologically distinct (a different *kind of thing*). No amount of physical information—no matter how complete—entails or explains the existence and nature of conscious experience.

The claim is negative and positive. Negatively: consciousness is not reducible to physics. Positively: there is something real beyond the physical that must be acknowledged in any complete account of reality.

## The Main Varieties

Dualism comes in two main forms, distinguished by their ontological commitments (see [[substance-property-dualism]] for detailed treatment):

### Substance Dualism

Substance dualism holds that mind and body are different *kinds of thing*—distinct substances. This is the Cartesian view: res cogitans (thinking substance) and res extensa (extended substance) are fundamentally different. Minds are genuine additions to the world's inventory, over and above physical objects.

Modern substance dualists (E.J. Lowe, Dean Zimmerman) accept that mental substances are part of the natural world while maintaining their distinctness from physical matter. David Chalmers has expressed preference for substance dualism because it better handles personal identity—the persisting subject is the consciousness itself, not just a physical system with phenomenal properties.

### Property Dualism

Property dualism holds that mental properties are genuinely different from physical properties without positing separate mental substances. Physical objects (brains, neurons) have two kinds of properties: physical properties (mass, charge, spatial location) and phenomenal properties ([[qualia]]). The properties are irreducible, but there is only one kind of object.

This includes positions like naturalistic dualism (Chalmers's early view), where phenomenal properties are fundamental features of nature that arise from physical complexity but don't reduce to physics.

### Which Matters for This Site

The site's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet is compatible with either formulation. What matters is the irreducibility claim: consciousness cannot be identified with or derived from physical processes. Both substance and property dualism deliver this. The downstream commitments—[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] and [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]—work with either ontological framework.

## Arguments for Dualism

Multiple independent arguments support the dualist conclusion. Their convergence is significant—different starting points reach the same destination.

### The Explanatory Gap

Joseph Levine's [[explanatory-gap]] identifies a structural problem: physical explanations describe how parts relate and systems behave, but subjective experience has qualitative, intrinsic character. No relational or dispositional description entails what red *looks like*. The gap isn't epistemic (we just don't know enough) but conceptual—physical description and phenomenal reality are different kinds of thing.

### The Conceivability Argument

We can coherently conceive of [[philosophical-zombies]]—beings physically identical to us but lacking conscious experience. Unlike scientific identities (water = H₂O), phenomenal concepts give us direct access to their referents. When we conceive of zombies, we don't merely *describe* a scenario—we positively grasp a world where all physical facts obtain and phenomenal facts do not.

If zombies are conceivable, they are metaphysically possible. If they are possible, consciousness is not necessitated by physical facts.

### The Knowledge Argument

Mary knows all physical facts about colour vision while living in a black-and-white room. When Mary sees red for the first time, she learns something new—what red looks like. This new knowledge is not deducible from physical facts. Frank Jackson's [[knowledge-argument]] targets physicalism directly: if all facts are physical, complete physical knowledge should yield all facts. Mary's surprise shows it doesn't.

### The Intrinsic Character of Qualia

[[Qualia]] have intrinsic character—what pain feels like, how red appears—that physical descriptions cannot capture. Physics describes relations between quantities (mass relative to other masses, charge interactions, spatial relations). But the redness of red is not a relation. It is an intrinsic quality present in experience. No amount of relational information yields intrinsic character.

For comprehensive treatment, see [[arguments-for-dualism]].

## Dualism and Interaction

A crucial question for dualism: if mind and matter are distinct, how do they relate? Three main answers:

**[[Interactionist-dualism|Interactionism]]**: Mind and body causally interact. Consciousness influences physical outcomes, and physical events influence consciousness. This is the site's position, specified in the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet.

**[[Epiphenomenalism]]**: Body affects mind, but not vice versa. Consciousness is real but causally inert—along for the ride but not influencing outcomes. The site rejects this because it is self-undermining: if consciousness causes nothing, we cannot trust our reports about consciousness.

**Parallelism**: Mind and body don't interact at all—they run in parallel without causal connection. This faces similar problems to epiphenomenalism and adds unexplained coordination.

The site's framework commits to interactionism, with the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet specifying where and how: at quantum indeterminacies, consciousness biases otherwise undetermined outcomes without violating conservation laws.

## Objections to Dualism

### The Interaction Problem

If mind is non-physical, how can it causally affect the physical world? Classical objections (Princess Elizabeth to Descartes, Leibniz on conservation laws) seemed devastating when physics was deterministic. But quantum mechanics reopens possibilities: at quantum indeterminacies, physics specifies probabilities, not outcomes. Consciousness could select among possibilities without injecting energy. See [[objections-to-interactionism]] for detailed treatment.

### The Parsimony Objection

Isn't materialism simpler? Why posit two kinds of thing when one might suffice? The site's [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet addresses this: parsimony is unreliable when concepts are inadequate. Materialism is "simpler" only if it explains what needs explaining. A theory that explains mechanisms but not experience achieves economy by ignoring the phenomenon.

### The Neural Correlation Objection

Doesn't neuroscience show that consciousness is just brain activity? Every mental state correlates with brain states. Drugs and damage alter experience predictably. But correlation is compatible with dualism. [[Interactionist-dualism|Interactionism]] predicts exactly these findings—if consciousness interfaces with the brain, we would expect tight correlations. The correlations show where consciousness interfaces with matter, not that consciousness is matter.

### The Cognitive Science Objection

Paul Bloom argued humans are "natural-born dualists" due to separate cognitive systems for physics and psychology—implying dualism is a cognitive bias to be outgrown. But Barrett et al.'s 2021 cross-cultural study found most people actually default to intuitive *materialism*, expecting mental states to cease at death. The cognitive science is contested, and more fundamentally, cognitive naturalness doesn't determine truth. See [[intuitive-dualism]] for the full debate.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Dualism is the site's first foundational commitment—the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]] states that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes.

This commitment is not arbitrary but grounded in the convergence of arguments: the explanatory gap, conceivability arguments, the knowledge argument, and the intrinsic character of qualia all point the same direction. [[Materialism]] in all its forms—reductive physicalism, functionalism, eliminativism—fails to bridge the gap between physical description and subjective experience.

Combined with the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet, the site holds [[interactionist-dualism]]—consciousness is distinct *and* causally efficacious. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet specifies the interface: quantum indeterminacies where physics leaves outcomes undetermined.

This framework is not a retreat to mystery. The interaction has a candidate mechanism (quantum selection via the Zeno effect or similar). The empirical findings (neural correlates) are predicted and explained. The position is coherent, parsimonious where parsimony matters (not positing unobserved forces), and takes seriously the one thing we know most directly: our own conscious experience.

## Further Reading

- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The site's position combining dualism with causal interaction
- [[substance-property-dualism]] — The two main ontological frameworks for dualism
- [[arguments-for-dualism]] — Comprehensive treatment of the positive case
- [[objections-to-interactionism]] — Major objections and detailed responses
- [[intuitive-dualism]] — Cognitive science debate on whether dualism is innate or learned
- [[materialism]] — The view dualism rejects and why
- [[epiphenomenalism]] — Dualism without interaction (rejected by this site)
- [[explanatory-gap]] — The structural problem physical description faces
- [[philosophical-zombies]] — The conceivability argument in detail
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room explained
- [[qualia]] — The phenomenal properties dualism holds are irreducible
- [[tenets]] — The site's five foundational commitments

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Descartes, R. (1641). *Meditations on First Philosophy*.
- Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. *Pacific Philosophical Quarterly*, 64, 354-361.
- Lowe, E. J. (2006). Non-Cartesian substance dualism and the problem of mental causation. *Erkenntnis*, 65(1), 5-23.
- Robinson, H. (2020). Substance dualism. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*.
- Swinburne, R. (2013). *Mind, Brain, & Free Will*. Oxford University Press.

Commit message:

review(deep): Verify Chalmers substance dualism claim in dualism.md
Addressed:
- Corrected unverified claim about Chalmers preferring substance dualism
  for "personal identity" reasons - changed to verified reasoning about
  the subject combination problem (Chalmers 2016)
- Added Chalmers 2016 citation to References
- Also fixed same claim in substance-property-dualism.md for consistency

Task: P0 Deep review dualism.md - verify Chalmers substance dualism claim
Session: 284

obsidian/concepts/dualism.md, after:

---
title: "Dualism"
created: 2026-01-19
modified: 2026-01-19
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T08:50:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[substance-property-dualism]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[arguments-for-dualism]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[intuitive-dualism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-19
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-19T08:50:00+00:00
---

Dualism holds that reality contains more than just physical matter—consciousness or mind is something distinct that cannot be fully explained by physics. This is the first of this site's [[tenets#^dualism|five foundational commitments]]. The position is supported by multiple independent arguments: the [[explanatory-gap]] between physical description and subjective experience, the conceivability of [[philosophical-zombies]], the [[knowledge-argument|knowledge argument]] (Mary's Room), and the intrinsic character of [[qualia]]. These arguments converge on a single conclusion: consciousness has features that physical description cannot capture.

## What Dualism Claims

At its core, dualism asserts an ontological distinction between mind and matter. Physical science describes mass, charge, spatial relations, causal interactions—the furniture of the physical world. But when we ask *what it is like* to see red, feel pain, or taste coffee, we encounter something different: the qualitative, subjective character of experience.

Dualism holds that this subjective dimension is not just epistemically distinct (a different *way of knowing*) but ontologically distinct (a different *kind of thing*). No amount of physical information—no matter how complete—entails or explains the existence and nature of conscious experience.

The claim is negative and positive. Negatively: consciousness is not reducible to physics. Positively: there is something real beyond the physical that must be acknowledged in any complete account of reality.

## The Main Varieties

Dualism comes in two main forms, distinguished by their ontological commitments (see [[substance-property-dualism]] for detailed treatment):

### Substance Dualism

Substance dualism holds that mind and body are different *kinds of thing*—distinct substances. This is the Cartesian view: res cogitans (thinking substance) and res extensa (extended substance) are fundamentally different. Minds are genuine additions to the world's inventory, over and above physical objects.

Modern substance dualists (E.J. Lowe, Dean Zimmerman) accept that mental substances are part of the natural world while maintaining their distinctness from physical matter. David Chalmers, though initially known for property dualism, has expressed preference for substance dualism in more recent work (Chalmers 2016). Part of his reasoning involves the subject combination problem: property dualism (especially in panpsychist versions) struggles to explain how micro-experiences combine into unified macro-subjects, while substance dualism posits unified subjects from the start.

### Property Dualism

Property dualism holds that mental properties are genuinely different from physical properties without positing separate mental substances. Physical objects (brains, neurons) have two kinds of properties: physical properties (mass, charge, spatial location) and phenomenal properties ([[qualia]]). The properties are irreducible, but there is only one kind of object.

This includes positions like naturalistic dualism (Chalmers's early view), where phenomenal properties are fundamental features of nature that arise from physical complexity but don't reduce to physics.

### Which Matters for This Site

The site's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet is compatible with either formulation. What matters is the irreducibility claim: consciousness cannot be identified with or derived from physical processes. Both substance and property dualism deliver this. The downstream commitments—[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] and [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]—work with either ontological framework.

## Arguments for Dualism

Multiple independent arguments support the dualist conclusion. Their convergence is significant—different starting points reach the same destination.

### The Explanatory Gap

Joseph Levine's [[explanatory-gap]] identifies a structural problem: physical explanations describe how parts relate and systems behave, but subjective experience has qualitative, intrinsic character. No relational or dispositional description entails what red *looks like*. The gap isn't epistemic (we just don't know enough) but conceptual—physical description and phenomenal reality are different kinds of thing.

### The Conceivability Argument

We can coherently conceive of [[philosophical-zombies]]—beings physically identical to us but lacking conscious experience. Unlike scientific identities (water = H₂O), phenomenal concepts give us direct access to their referents. When we conceive of zombies, we don't merely *describe* a scenario—we positively grasp a world where all physical facts obtain and phenomenal facts do not.

If zombies are conceivable, they are metaphysically possible. If they are possible, consciousness is not necessitated by physical facts.

### The Knowledge Argument

Mary knows all physical facts about colour vision while living in a black-and-white room. When Mary sees red for the first time, she learns something new—what red looks like. This new knowledge is not deducible from physical facts. Frank Jackson's [[knowledge-argument]] targets physicalism directly: if all facts are physical, complete physical knowledge should yield all facts. Mary's surprise shows it doesn't.

### The Intrinsic Character of Qualia

[[Qualia]] have intrinsic character—what pain feels like, how red appears—that physical descriptions cannot capture. Physics describes relations between quantities (mass relative to other masses, charge interactions, spatial relations). But the redness of red is not a relation. It is an intrinsic quality present in experience. No amount of relational information yields intrinsic character.

For comprehensive treatment, see [[arguments-for-dualism]].

## Dualism and Interaction

A crucial question for dualism: if mind and matter are distinct, how do they relate? Three main answers:

**[[Interactionist-dualism|Interactionism]]**: Mind and body causally interact. Consciousness influences physical outcomes, and physical events influence consciousness. This is the site's position, specified in the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet.

**[[Epiphenomenalism]]**: Body affects mind, but not vice versa. Consciousness is real but causally inert—along for the ride but not influencing outcomes. The site rejects this because it is self-undermining: if consciousness causes nothing, we cannot trust our reports about consciousness.

**Parallelism**: Mind and body don't interact at all—they run in parallel without causal connection. This faces similar problems to epiphenomenalism and adds unexplained coordination.

The site's framework commits to interactionism, with the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet specifying where and how: at quantum indeterminacies, consciousness biases otherwise undetermined outcomes without violating conservation laws.

## Objections to Dualism

### The Interaction Problem

If mind is non-physical, how can it causally affect the physical world? Classical objections (Princess Elizabeth to Descartes, Leibniz on conservation laws) seemed devastating when physics was deterministic. But quantum mechanics reopens possibilities: at quantum indeterminacies, physics specifies probabilities, not outcomes. Consciousness could select among possibilities without injecting energy. See [[objections-to-interactionism]] for detailed treatment.

### The Parsimony Objection

Isn't materialism simpler? Why posit two kinds of thing when one might suffice? The site's [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet addresses this: parsimony is unreliable when concepts are inadequate. Materialism is "simpler" only if it explains what needs explaining. A theory that explains mechanisms but not experience achieves economy by ignoring the phenomenon.

### The Neural Correlation Objection

Doesn't neuroscience show that consciousness is just brain activity? Every mental state correlates with brain states. Drugs and damage alter experience predictably. But correlation is compatible with dualism. [[Interactionist-dualism|Interactionism]] predicts exactly these findings—if consciousness interfaces with the brain, we would expect tight correlations. The correlations show where consciousness interfaces with matter, not that consciousness is matter.

### The Cognitive Science Objection

Paul Bloom argued humans are "natural-born dualists" due to separate cognitive systems for physics and psychology—implying dualism is a cognitive bias to be outgrown. But Barrett et al.'s 2021 cross-cultural study found most people actually default to intuitive *materialism*, expecting mental states to cease at death. The cognitive science is contested, and more fundamentally, cognitive naturalness doesn't determine truth. See [[intuitive-dualism]] for the full debate.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Dualism is the site's first foundational commitment—the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]] states that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes.

This commitment is not arbitrary but grounded in the convergence of arguments: the explanatory gap, conceivability arguments, the knowledge argument, and the intrinsic character of qualia all point the same direction. [[Materialism]] in all its forms—reductive physicalism, functionalism, eliminativism—fails to bridge the gap between physical description and subjective experience.

Combined with the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet, the site holds [[interactionist-dualism]]—consciousness is distinct *and* causally efficacious. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet specifies the interface: quantum indeterminacies where physics leaves outcomes undetermined.

This framework is not a retreat to mystery. The interaction has a candidate mechanism (quantum selection via the Zeno effect or similar). The empirical findings (neural correlates) are predicted and explained. The position is coherent, parsimonious where parsimony matters (not positing unobserved forces), and takes seriously the one thing we know most directly: our own conscious experience.

## Further Reading

- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The site's position combining dualism with causal interaction
- [[substance-property-dualism]] — The two main ontological frameworks for dualism
- [[arguments-for-dualism]] — Comprehensive treatment of the positive case
- [[objections-to-interactionism]] — Major objections and detailed responses
- [[intuitive-dualism]] — Cognitive science debate on whether dualism is innate or learned
- [[materialism]] — The view dualism rejects and why
- [[epiphenomenalism]] — Dualism without interaction (rejected by this site)
- [[explanatory-gap]] — The structural problem physical description faces
- [[philosophical-zombies]] — The conceivability argument in detail
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room explained
- [[qualia]] — The phenomenal properties dualism holds are irreducible
- [[tenets]] — The site's five foundational commitments

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Descartes, R. (1641). *Meditations on First Philosophy*.
- Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. *Pacific Philosophical Quarterly*, 64, 354-361.
- Lowe, E. J. (2006). Non-Cartesian substance dualism and the problem of mental causation. *Erkenntnis*, 65(1), 5-23.
- Robinson, H. (2020). Substance dualism. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*.
- Swinburne, R. (2013). *Mind, Brain, & Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Chalmers, D.J. (2016). The combination problem for panpsychism. In G. Brüntrup & L. Jaskolla (Eds.), *Panpsychism: Contemporary Perspectives* (pp. 179-214). Oxford University Press.
