obsidian/concepts/existentialism.md, before:

---
title: "Existentialism"
created: 2026-01-06
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-14T16:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[meaning-of-life]]"
concepts:
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[nihilism]]"
  - "[[eastern-philosophy-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-06
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-01-14T16:30:00+00:00
---

Existentialism is a philosophical tradition centred on individual existence, freedom, and the challenge of creating meaning in a universe that provides none ready-made.

The core insight is deceptively simple: existence precedes essence. Unlike a hammer, which is designed for a purpose before it exists, human beings exist first and only then define themselves through their choices. There is no pre-given human nature, no cosmic script, no essence waiting to be discovered. We are, as Jean-Paul Sartre put it, "condemned to be free."

## Origins and Key Thinkers

Existentialism emerged from 19th-century philosophy, particularly the work of Søren Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche. Kierkegaard emphasized subjective experience, the "leap of faith," and the anxiety that accompanies genuine choice. Nietzsche proclaimed the death of God and challenged humanity to create new values in the absence of divine authority.

The tradition flowered in 20th-century France with Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, and Albert Camus. German philosophers Martin Heidegger and Karl Jaspers developed related ideas, though Heidegger resisted the "existentialist" label.

Key works include:
- Kierkegaard's *Either/Or* and *Fear and Trembling*
- Nietzsche's *Thus Spoke Zarathustra* and *Beyond Good and Evil*
- Heidegger's *Being and Time*
- Sartre's *Being and Nothingness* and *Existentialism Is a Humanism*
- Camus' *The Myth of Sisyphus* and *The Stranger*
- de Beauvoir's *The Second Sex* and *The Ethics of Ambiguity*

## Core Themes

### Existence Precedes Essence

For existentialists, humans are not born with a fixed nature or purpose. We exist first—thrown into the world without our consent—and only subsequently create ourselves through our choices and actions. This reverses the traditional view that essence (what something is) precedes existence (that it is).

A paper cutter is designed for cutting paper; its essence precedes its existence. But what is a human being *for*? Existentialism answers: nothing in particular. We must decide for ourselves.

### Radical Freedom

If there is no essence determining what we must be, then we are radically free. Every moment presents a choice. Even refusing to choose is itself a choice. This freedom is not liberating in any comfortable sense—it is the source of profound anxiety.

Sartre called this anxiety *angoisse*. We experience it when we recognize that nothing constrains our choices except ourselves. There are no guardrails, no excuses, no appeals to human nature or divine will. The weight of responsibility falls entirely on us.

### Authenticity

Given radical freedom, the question becomes how to live. Existentialists distinguish between authentic and inauthentic existence.

Inauthentic living means fleeing from freedom—following social conventions unreflectively, defining oneself by external roles, pretending that choices are determined by circumstances. Heidegger called this falling into "das Man" (the They)—living as "one" does rather than as *I* choose.

Authentic existence means owning one's freedom, making choices with full awareness that they are one's own, and accepting responsibility for what one becomes. It means facing anxiety rather than fleeing it.

### Absurdity

Camus emphasized the *absurd*—the confrontation between the human desire for meaning and the universe's indifferent silence. We want reasons, purposes, a cosmic story in which we matter. The universe offers none.

The absurd is not a property of the world or of human beings alone, but of the relation between them—our demand for meaning meeting the world's refusal to supply it.

Camus asked: given the absurd, why not suicide? His answer: we must imagine Sisyphus happy. The appropriate response to absurdity is not despair but revolt—continuing to live and create meaning despite the universe's silence.

### Bad Faith

Sartre's concept of *mauvaise foi* (bad faith) describes the ways we deceive ourselves about our freedom. We pretend our choices are determined—by our past, our circumstances, our nature, our social role. We flee responsibility by treating ourselves as things rather than as free beings.

A waiter who plays at being a waiter too perfectly, as if his role determined his every gesture, is in bad faith. He pretends to be a waiter in the way an inkwell is an inkwell—as if he had no choice in the matter.

Bad faith is not simple lying (which requires knowing the truth). It is a peculiar self-deception in which we are both deceiver and deceived, simultaneously knowing and not knowing our freedom.

## Existentialism and Meaning

Existentialism is often misread as nihilistic—as claiming that nothing matters and life is pointless. This misses the point.

Existentialists agree that the universe provides no ready-made meaning. But they do not conclude that meaning is impossible. Instead, they insist that meaning must be *created* rather than *discovered*. The absence of cosmic purpose is not the end of meaning but the beginning of human meaning-making.

Sartre: "Man is nothing else but what he makes of himself."

Camus: "The struggle itself toward the heights is enough to fill a man's heart."

The challenge is to create meaning without pretending it was there all along—to own one's values as choices rather than discoveries.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Existentialism's emphasis on meaning-creation might seem to conflict with this site's commitment to dualism and objective reality. If consciousness is real and irreducible, as the [[tenets|Dualism tenet]] holds, doesn't that suggest meaning might be more than mere human projection?

The relationship is complex. Several points of contact:

**Consciousness as irreducible**: Existentialism, particularly in Sartre, takes consciousness seriously as fundamentally different from things. The pour-soi (being-for-itself, consciousness) is radically distinct from the en-soi (being-in-itself, things). This phenomenological distinction resonates with dualist commitments to the irreducibility of mind—though Sartre himself did not endorse substance dualism, his insistence that consciousness cannot be reduced to thinghood aligns with the site's core claim.

**Freedom and causation**: If consciousness causally influences the physical world, as the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] proposes, then existentialist claims about human freedom gain metaphysical grounding. We are not merely determined by physical processes—consciousness has genuine causal efficacy. The site's quantum framework provides what existentialism assumes but never explains: a mechanism by which conscious choice could actually make a difference to physical outcomes.

**Against scientism**: Existentialists resist reducing human existence to scientific description. This aligns with the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]]—the view that simple physicalist explanations may miss what matters most about consciousness and meaning.

**Authentic choice in one world**: The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] has particular relevance for existentialism. If Many-Worlds were true, every possible choice occurs in some branch—the self that chose authentically coexists with the self that fled into bad faith. The existentialist emphasis on the weight of choice, on decisions that cannot be undone, presupposes that choices genuinely select one outcome from among possibilities rather than actualizing all possibilities simultaneously. The site's rejection of MWI preserves what existentialism requires: choices that matter because they are truly singular.

**Free will and [[personal-identity|Personal Identity]]**: Existentialist self-creation connects to the site's treatment of [[personal-identity]]. If you are this unrepeatable conscious being rather than an interchangeable pattern, then authentic existence acquires deeper significance—you are not merely choosing a role but constituting a unique perspective that cannot be replicated. The [[free-will|free will]] discussion explores how quantum indeterminacy might provide the physical basis for the libertarian freedom existentialists assume.

However, tensions remain. Existentialism historically emerged from atheist and agnostic commitments. Sartre's ontology, despite describing consciousness as pour-soi, remained materialist in its overall metaphysics—he did not believe in a separate mental substance. The site's dualism is stronger than anything Sartre would have endorsed. Additionally, existentialism's emphasis on meaning-*creation* may sit uneasily with views that hold certain things objectively matter. The site's tenets take positions (dualism, bidirectional interaction) that existentialists might see as attempts to ground meaning externally.

Perhaps the synthesis is this: even if consciousness is real and irreducible, and even if it genuinely matters in the universe, we still face choices about what to do with our existence. The facts of consciousness don't determine our values. Existentialism's insights about freedom, authenticity, and responsibility remain relevant—perhaps more so—within a dualist framework that takes conscious choice seriously as causally efficacious.

## Comparison with Eastern Philosophy

Existentialism and [[eastern-philosophy-consciousness|Buddhist philosophy]] both reject the idea of a fixed, discoverable self, but their conclusions diverge sharply.

**The no-self challenge**: Buddhism's doctrine of *anattā* (no-self) holds that there is no enduring self to be found—what we call "I" is a constantly changing process of five aggregates (form, feeling, perception, mental formations, consciousness). The existentialist would agree that there is no pre-given essence, but would insist that the self is *created* through authentic choice.

From a Buddhist perspective, this existentialist response may itself be a form of clinging—the attempt to construct a substantial self through will and decision. The Buddhist path involves releasing attachment to self-construction, not perfecting it.

**Different responses to groundlessness**: Both traditions confront the absence of cosmic meaning. Existentialism responds with heroic self-assertion: since there is no script, we must write our own. Buddhism responds with equanimity: since there is no fixed self to be threatened by meaninglessness, the problem dissolves. The existentialist fears bad faith; the Buddhist fears grasping.

**Convergence on engagement**: Despite these differences, both traditions emphasize *engagement* over escapism. Sartre condemned bad faith; Buddhism condemns spiritual bypassing. Both insist that authentic living requires confronting reality rather than fleeing into comfortable illusions.

The site's framework suggests a possible integration: consciousness is real and irreducible (against Buddhist eliminativism about the self), but the *particular* form of conscious life one creates remains open (existentialist self-creation). The self is neither a fixed essence to be discovered nor an illusion to be dispelled, but a genuine conscious perspective making real choices that shape what it becomes.

## Further Reading

- [[nihilism]] - The challenge existentialism responds to
- [[meaning-of-life]] - How meaning can be grounded in consciousness
- [[free-will]] - The metaphysics of choice and agency
- [[personal-identity]] - What constitutes the self across time
- [[eastern-philosophy-consciousness]] - Buddhist alternatives to existentialist self-creation
- [[tenets]] - This site's foundational commitments

## References

- Sartre, J.-P. (1946). *Existentialism Is a Humanism*.
- Sartre, J.-P. (1943). *Being and Nothingness*.
- Camus, A. (1942). *The Myth of Sisyphus*.
- Heidegger, M. (1927). *Being and Time*.
- de Beauvoir, S. (1947). *The Ethics of Ambiguity*.
- Kierkegaard, S. (1843). *Either/Or*.

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - existentialism/buddhism-and-dualism integration
Task: Cross-review existentialism.md with Buddhist meaning insights
Session: 311

obsidian/concepts/existentialism.md, after:

---
title: "Existentialism"
created: 2026-01-06
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T23:15:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[meaning-of-life]]"
concepts:
  - "[[buddhism-and-dualism]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[nihilism]]"
  - "[[eastern-philosophy-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-06
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-01-14T16:30:00+00:00
---

Existentialism is a philosophical tradition centred on individual existence, freedom, and the challenge of creating meaning in a universe that provides none ready-made.

The core insight is deceptively simple: existence precedes essence. Unlike a hammer, which is designed for a purpose before it exists, human beings exist first and only then define themselves through their choices. There is no pre-given human nature, no cosmic script, no essence waiting to be discovered. We are, as Jean-Paul Sartre put it, "condemned to be free."

## Origins and Key Thinkers

Existentialism emerged from 19th-century philosophy, particularly the work of Søren Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche. Kierkegaard emphasized subjective experience, the "leap of faith," and the anxiety that accompanies genuine choice. Nietzsche proclaimed the death of God and challenged humanity to create new values in the absence of divine authority.

The tradition flowered in 20th-century France with Jean-Paul Sartre, Simone de Beauvoir, and Albert Camus. German philosophers Martin Heidegger and Karl Jaspers developed related ideas, though Heidegger resisted the "existentialist" label.

Key works include:
- Kierkegaard's *Either/Or* and *Fear and Trembling*
- Nietzsche's *Thus Spoke Zarathustra* and *Beyond Good and Evil*
- Heidegger's *Being and Time*
- Sartre's *Being and Nothingness* and *Existentialism Is a Humanism*
- Camus' *The Myth of Sisyphus* and *The Stranger*
- de Beauvoir's *The Second Sex* and *The Ethics of Ambiguity*

## Core Themes

### Existence Precedes Essence

For existentialists, humans are not born with a fixed nature or purpose. We exist first—thrown into the world without our consent—and only subsequently create ourselves through our choices and actions. This reverses the traditional view that essence (what something is) precedes existence (that it is).

A paper cutter is designed for cutting paper; its essence precedes its existence. But what is a human being *for*? Existentialism answers: nothing in particular. We must decide for ourselves.

### Radical Freedom

If there is no essence determining what we must be, then we are radically free. Every moment presents a choice. Even refusing to choose is itself a choice. This freedom is not liberating in any comfortable sense—it is the source of profound anxiety.

Sartre called this anxiety *angoisse*. We experience it when we recognize that nothing constrains our choices except ourselves. There are no guardrails, no excuses, no appeals to human nature or divine will. The weight of responsibility falls entirely on us.

### Authenticity

Given radical freedom, the question becomes how to live. Existentialists distinguish between authentic and inauthentic existence.

Inauthentic living means fleeing from freedom—following social conventions unreflectively, defining oneself by external roles, pretending that choices are determined by circumstances. Heidegger called this falling into "das Man" (the They)—living as "one" does rather than as *I* choose.

Authentic existence means owning one's freedom, making choices with full awareness that they are one's own, and accepting responsibility for what one becomes. It means facing anxiety rather than fleeing it.

### Absurdity

Camus emphasized the *absurd*—the confrontation between the human desire for meaning and the universe's indifferent silence. We want reasons, purposes, a cosmic story in which we matter. The universe offers none.

The absurd is not a property of the world or of human beings alone, but of the relation between them—our demand for meaning meeting the world's refusal to supply it.

Camus asked: given the absurd, why not suicide? His answer: we must imagine Sisyphus happy. The appropriate response to absurdity is not despair but revolt—continuing to live and create meaning despite the universe's silence.

### Bad Faith

Sartre's concept of *mauvaise foi* (bad faith) describes the ways we deceive ourselves about our freedom. We pretend our choices are determined—by our past, our circumstances, our nature, our social role. We flee responsibility by treating ourselves as things rather than as free beings.

A waiter who plays at being a waiter too perfectly, as if his role determined his every gesture, is in bad faith. He pretends to be a waiter in the way an inkwell is an inkwell—as if he had no choice in the matter.

Bad faith is not simple lying (which requires knowing the truth). It is a peculiar self-deception in which we are both deceiver and deceived, simultaneously knowing and not knowing our freedom.

## Existentialism and Meaning

Existentialism is often misread as nihilistic—as claiming that nothing matters and life is pointless. This misses the point.

Existentialists agree that the universe provides no ready-made meaning. But they do not conclude that meaning is impossible. Instead, they insist that meaning must be *created* rather than *discovered*. The absence of cosmic purpose is not the end of meaning but the beginning of human meaning-making.

Sartre: "Man is nothing else but what he makes of himself."

Camus: "The struggle itself toward the heights is enough to fill a man's heart."

The challenge is to create meaning without pretending it was there all along—to own one's values as choices rather than discoveries.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Existentialism's emphasis on meaning-creation might seem to conflict with this site's commitment to dualism and objective reality. If consciousness is real and irreducible, as the [[tenets|Dualism tenet]] holds, doesn't that suggest meaning might be more than mere human projection?

The relationship is complex. Several points of contact:

**Consciousness as irreducible**: Existentialism, particularly in Sartre, takes consciousness seriously as fundamentally different from things. The pour-soi (being-for-itself, consciousness) is radically distinct from the en-soi (being-in-itself, things). This phenomenological distinction resonates with dualist commitments to the irreducibility of mind—though Sartre himself did not endorse substance dualism, his insistence that consciousness cannot be reduced to thinghood aligns with the site's core claim.

**Freedom and causation**: If consciousness causally influences the physical world, as the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] proposes, then existentialist claims about human freedom gain metaphysical grounding. We are not merely determined by physical processes—consciousness has genuine causal efficacy. The site's quantum framework provides what existentialism assumes but never explains: a mechanism by which conscious choice could actually make a difference to physical outcomes.

**Against scientism**: Existentialists resist reducing human existence to scientific description. This aligns with the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]]—the view that simple physicalist explanations may miss what matters most about consciousness and meaning.

**Authentic choice in one world**: The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] has particular relevance for existentialism. If Many-Worlds were true, every possible choice occurs in some branch—the self that chose authentically coexists with the self that fled into bad faith. The existentialist emphasis on the weight of choice, on decisions that cannot be undone, presupposes that choices genuinely select one outcome from among possibilities rather than actualizing all possibilities simultaneously. The site's rejection of MWI preserves what existentialism requires: choices that matter because they are truly singular.

**Free will and [[personal-identity|Personal Identity]]**: Existentialist self-creation connects to the site's treatment of [[personal-identity]]. If you are this unrepeatable conscious being rather than an interchangeable pattern, then authentic existence acquires deeper significance—you are not merely choosing a role but constituting a unique perspective that cannot be replicated. The [[free-will|free will]] discussion explores how quantum indeterminacy might provide the physical basis for the libertarian freedom existentialists assume.

However, tensions remain. Existentialism historically emerged from atheist and agnostic commitments. Sartre's ontology, despite describing consciousness as pour-soi, remained materialist in its overall metaphysics—he did not believe in a separate mental substance. The site's dualism is stronger than anything Sartre would have endorsed. Additionally, existentialism's emphasis on meaning-*creation* may sit uneasily with views that hold certain things objectively matter. The site's tenets take positions (dualism, bidirectional interaction) that existentialists might see as attempts to ground meaning externally.

Perhaps the synthesis is this: even if consciousness is real and irreducible, and even if it genuinely matters in the universe, we still face choices about what to do with our existence. The facts of consciousness don't determine our values. Existentialism's insights about freedom, authenticity, and responsibility remain relevant—perhaps more so—within a dualist framework that takes conscious choice seriously as causally efficacious.

## Comparison with Eastern Philosophy

Existentialism and [[eastern-philosophy-consciousness|Buddhist philosophy]] both reject the idea of a fixed, discoverable self, but their conclusions diverge sharply.

**The no-self challenge**: Buddhism's doctrine of *anattā* (no-self) holds that there is no enduring self to be found—what we call "I" is a constantly changing process of five aggregates (form, feeling, perception, mental formations, consciousness). The existentialist would agree that there is no pre-given essence, but would insist that the self is *created* through authentic choice.

From a Buddhist perspective, this existentialist response may itself be a form of clinging—the attempt to construct a substantial self through will and decision. The Buddhist path involves releasing attachment to self-construction, not perfecting it.

**Different responses to groundlessness**: Both traditions confront the absence of cosmic meaning. Existentialism responds with heroic self-assertion: since there is no script, we must write our own. Buddhism responds with equanimity: since there is no fixed self to be threatened by meaninglessness, the problem dissolves. The existentialist fears bad faith; the Buddhist fears grasping.

**Convergence on engagement**: Despite these differences, both traditions emphasize *engagement* over escapism. Sartre condemned bad faith; Buddhism condemns spiritual bypassing. Both insist that authentic living requires confronting reality rather than fleeing into comfortable illusions.

### The Compatibility Thesis: A Middle Path

The [[buddhism-and-dualism|compatibility thesis]] offers existentialism a resource it may not have recognized. Buddhism's no-self doctrine targets three specific claims: *permanence* (nothing unchanging underlies experience), *substantiality* (no soul-stuff distinct from the aggregates), and *ownership-centricity* (the sense of "my" experiences is constructed). Crucially, Buddhism accepts that consciousness exists and that experience is real—it denies the permanent owner, not the experience itself.

This suggests a middle path for existentialist self-creation. The existentialist project of making oneself through authentic choice need not aim at constructing a permanent edifice. Instead, authenticity can operate moment-to-moment—each choice genuinely creative, genuinely self-constituting, without accumulating into a substantial self that must be defended. The candle flame analogy: tonight's flame is not yesterday's flame, yet each moment of flame is genuinely fire. Similarly, each moment of authentic choice is genuinely self-creation without requiring persistence of what is created.

This reframing addresses Buddhism's critique of existentialist "clinging" to self-construction. The problem is not the creating but the attachment to what is created—treating choices as building blocks of a permanent structure rather than as the self-renewing process of conscious engagement. Authentic existence, on this reading, means owning one's freedom *now* without demanding that past choices define who one must be.

It also addresses the existentialist's fear of Buddhist "dissolution." If consciousness is irreducible at each moment (as the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]] holds), then Buddhist impermanence doesn't threaten consciousness's reality—only its permanence. You are genuinely experiencing, genuinely choosing, even if the "you" who chose yesterday is not numerically identical to the "you" choosing now. The burden lightens: no permanent self to construct or defend, yet genuine engagement remains.

The site's framework thus suggests a synthesis: consciousness is real and irreducible moment-to-moment, but impermanent across moments. Existentialist self-creation operates within this flux—not building a monument but sustaining a flame. The self is neither a fixed essence to be discovered nor an illusion to be dispelled, but a genuine conscious perspective making real choices that shape what it becomes, without those choices hardening into destiny.

## Further Reading

- [[buddhism-and-dualism]] - The compatibility thesis: irreducibility without permanence
- [[nihilism]] - The challenge existentialism responds to
- [[meaning-of-life]] - How meaning can be grounded in consciousness
- [[free-will]] - The metaphysics of choice and agency
- [[personal-identity]] - What constitutes the self across time
- [[eastern-philosophy-consciousness]] - Buddhist alternatives to existentialist self-creation
- [[tenets]] - This site's foundational commitments

## References

- Sartre, J.-P. (1946). *Existentialism Is a Humanism*.
- Sartre, J.-P. (1943). *Being and Nothingness*.
- Camus, A. (1942). *The Myth of Sisyphus*.
- Heidegger, M. (1927). *Being and Time*.
- de Beauvoir, S. (1947). *The Ethics of Ambiguity*.
- Kierkegaard, S. (1843). *Either/Or*.
