obsidian/concepts/indexical-knowledge-and-identity.md, before:

---
title: "Indexical Knowledge and Identity"
description: "Knowledge expressible only as 'I', 'here', 'now'—irreducible to impersonal description, grounding personal identity, and central to consciousness and the vertiginous question."
created: 2026-01-27
modified: 2026-02-13
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-13T21:34:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[vertiginous-question]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[haecceity]]"
  - "[[self-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]]"
  - "[[consciousness-only-territories]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-13
last_curated:
last_deep_review:
coalesced_from:
  - "/concepts/indexical-facts/"
  - "/concepts/indexical-knowledge/"
  - "/concepts/self-locating-beliefs/"
---

Indexical knowledge is knowledge expressible only through context-dependent terms—"I," "here," "now," "this"—whose reference shifts with the speaker. The fact that *I* am this person, that *this* is happening *now*, that the pain is *here*—these resist translation into impersonal, context-free language. This irreducibility operates at two levels: epistemically (indexical knowledge has distinctive cognitive and motivational properties) and potentially ontologically (the world may contain irreducible indexical facts that impersonal description cannot capture). Whether the epistemic or metaphysical thesis holds matters directly for debates about [[phenomenal-consciousness]], [[personal-identity]], and the [[vertiginous-question]].

## Perry's Essential Indexical

John Perry's 1979 paper established the modern framework. Perry follows a trail of sugar through a supermarket, intending to find the careless shopper. He knows "someone with a torn bag is making a mess." Then he realises: *I am making the mess*. The impersonal belief and the indexical belief describe the same state of affairs, yet only the indexical belief prompts him to check his own cart.

The motivational difference is the clue. If "I am making the mess" were merely another way of representing "Perry is making the mess," then someone who already believed the latter should act accordingly. But Perry *did* believe that Perry was making a mess—he just didn't connect this to himself. The indexical belief adds something the third-person description lacks: a link between the proposition and the subject's capacity to act.

Perry's conclusion: some beliefs are essentially indexical. They cannot be replaced by any set of impersonal beliefs without loss. The "I" in "I am making the mess" is not eliminable in favour of a name, description, or coordinate.

## Lewis's Two Gods

David Lewis's scenario sharpens the point with maximal force. Two omniscient gods know every impersonal fact about the universe—every particle's position, every event's timing, every causal law.

Yet each god might not know which god they are.

One resides on the tallest mountain, the other in the deepest ocean. The complete physical description doesn't privilege either location. The mountain god knows "one god is on the mountain and one in the ocean." What this god doesn't know from impersonal facts alone is: *I am the mountain god*.

This self-locating knowledge requires something beyond omniscience about the world's structure. Even knowing everything about *what* exists, you can be ignorant about *where you are* among what exists.

## Three Grades of Indexical Knowledge

Not all indexical knowledge is alike. Three grades can be distinguished:

**Perspectival knowledge** is the weakest grade. Knowing "it is raining here" rather than "it is raining in London" involves an indexical, but the content is readily translatable. Most spatial and temporal indexicals fall into this category.

**Self-locating knowledge** is stronger. Lewis's Two Gods each know every impersonal fact yet cannot determine which god they are. The knowledge "I am the mountain god" cannot be derived from any impersonal description. This is where the distinction between [[#from-epistemic-to-metaphysical|epistemic and metaphysical theses]] (explained below) becomes critical.

**Phenomenal indexical knowledge** is the strongest grade. Knowing *what it is like* to see red—not that certain wavelengths stimulate certain cones, but the qualitative character of the experience as undergone by *this* subject—resists translation into any impersonal vocabulary. This is what Mary gains when she leaves her black-and-white room in the [[knowledge-argument]]. Phenomenal indexical knowledge combines the irreducibility of self-location with the irreducibility of qualitative experience. It is doubly perspectival: accessible only from a particular subject-position *and* only through having the experience.

These grades are cumulative. Phenomenal indexical knowledge includes self-locating knowledge, which in turn includes perspectival knowledge. But each stronger grade adds something the weaker grades lack.

## From Epistemic to Metaphysical {#from-epistemic-to-metaphysical}

The philosophical significance turns on a crucial distinction:

**The epistemic thesis**: Indexical knowledge is cognitively irreducible. No amount of impersonal information generates the belief "I am this person." Perry's case and Lewis's Two Gods establish this convincingly. Even philosophers sceptical of indexical *facts* generally accept that indexical *knowledge* has distinctive cognitive and motivational properties.

**The metaphysical thesis**: Indexical knowledge tracks ontologically real indexical facts—features of reality that impersonal description cannot capture. A deflationist might grant that indexical *beliefs* are cognitively special while insisting the *world* contains only impersonal facts.

The difference matters for consciousness. If only the epistemic thesis holds, indexical knowledge is a feature of how certain physical systems represent information—interesting for cognitive science but no threat to physicalism. If the metaphysical thesis also holds, then reality contains more than physics describes, supporting the case for [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]].

The Unfinishable Map's position requires the metaphysical thesis. Three arguments support it:

**The explanatory gap argument**: If self-locating knowledge were merely a way of representing impersonal facts, we should be able to explain *why* this mode of representation exists in purely impersonal terms. But the attempt seems circular. To explain why a system has self-locating representations, we need to specify *which* system—and "which" is itself an indexical notion. The explanatory project presupposes what it's trying to explain away.

**The phenomenological argument**: The immediacy of self-locating knowledge suggests it tracks something real. You don't infer "I exist" from impersonal premises—the knowledge is given directly. If indexical facts were merely modes of access to impersonal facts, the knowledge should feel derivative. Instead, it has a directness suggesting it is not derived from anything more basic.

**The counterfactual argument**: If there were only impersonal facts, the question "why am I *this* subject?" would be meaningless or trivially answered. But the question feels meaningful and non-trivial. If the question is coherent, what would make its answer true or false? Impersonal facts alone don't seem sufficient; something must ground the indexical.

Christian List argues that irreducible indexical facts provide evidence against "third-personal metaphysics"—any picture treating reality as fully describable without indexicals. If physics describes the universe in context-free terms yet self-locating knowledge adds something physics doesn't contain, then physics is incomplete as an account of what exists.

## The Problem for Physicalism

Physics aims to describe reality in context-independent terms—particle positions, field strengths, causal laws. Indexical facts challenge this. Physics tells you what exists and how things relate, but not *which* of those things you are or *where* you stand in the causal network.

A complete physical description of the universe would specify every brain, every neural pattern, every conscious experience (if consciousness is physical). But would it tell you which brain is yours? The description treats all brains equally—no brain is privileged as "the one I am." The indexical fact "this brain is mine" adds something the physical description lacks.

This connects to the [[knowledge-argument]]. Mary knows all physical facts about colour vision but lacks phenomenal indexical knowledge of *what it is like* to see red. The gap between her pre-release and post-release knowledge is precisely the gap between impersonal and phenomenal indexical knowledge—the strongest grade, requiring both the right subject-position and the right experience.

Science aspires to describe reality from no particular perspective—Thomas Nagel's "view from nowhere." But consciousness *is* perspective. The first-person dimension of indexical knowledge resists incorporation into the objective picture. The limitation is structural, not practical.

## Indexical Identity and Personal Identity

The question "what makes me the same person over time?" traditionally concerns criteria of identity—psychological continuity, physical continuity, or both. But indexical knowledge raises a prior question: what makes me *this* person right now?

Pattern-identity theories (following Parfit) hold that personal identity consists in patterns of psychological continuity. But indexical facts resist pattern reduction. Two people could hypothetically share all psychological patterns (through perfect copying), yet there would be a fact about which one is me. The indexical "I" picks out something that patterns alone don't determine.

The connection to [[haecceity]] runs deep. Haecceity is primitive "thisness" that makes something *this* particular thing rather than another qualitatively identical thing. Robert Adams argued that "primitive thisness" cannot be reduced to general properties. Self-locating knowledge tracks haecceitistic facts—the fact that *I* am this subject, that *this* experience is happening to me.

Teleportation thought experiments sharpen the point. If you are scanned, destroyed, and reconstructed on Mars, the replica has all your qualitative properties. The question is whether *you*—this subject—survive. Self-locating knowledge brings out what's at stake: not whether a qualitative duplicate exists, but whether the indexical continuity persists.

## The Sleeping Beauty Problem

The Sleeping Beauty problem tests theories of self-locating belief. Beauty is put to sleep on Sunday. A fair coin is flipped. If heads, she wakes Monday and the experiment ends. If tails, she wakes Monday, has her memory erased, then wakes again Tuesday.

Upon waking, Beauty knows the experimental setup. What probability should she assign to heads?

**Thirders** say 1/3: three possible awakenings (heads-Monday, tails-Monday, tails-Tuesday), equally likely. **Halfers** say 1/2: the coin is fair; no new evidence has arrived.

The disagreement reveals something about self-locating uncertainty. Beauty doesn't lack any impersonal fact. What she lacks is self-locating knowledge: which awakening is this? Whether self-locating uncertainty behaves like ordinary uncertainty remains contested, but the problem demonstrates that self-location is a distinctive epistemic category.

## Implications for Many-Worlds

The [[many-worlds]] interpretation holds that every quantum measurement causes branching—all outcomes occur in parallel, each equally real. Indexical knowledge creates problems for this picture.

Before measurement, there is one observer. After branching, there are multiple successors in different branches. Everettians propose that pre-measurement uncertainty about which outcome you'll see is "self-locating uncertainty"—uncertainty about which branch you're in, analogous to Beauty's uncertainty about which awakening she's experiencing.

The Map's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet finds these accounts unsatisfying:

**The framework mismatch**: Self-locating uncertainty normally presupposes a single reality with indexically uncertain facts. Beauty is in *one* awakening; she just doesn't know which. In many-worlds, you end up in *all* branches. The uncertainty framework seems inapplicable when all outcomes occur.

**The haecceitistic problem**: If personal identity involves [[haecceity]], then "which branch am I in?" asks about a haecceitistic fact. But many-worlds provides no such facts. All branches are equally real, all successors equally continuous with you. Nothing grounds the self-locating belief "I am in this branch."

**The phenomenological mismatch**: You will experience one definite sequence of outcomes, not multiple incompatible ones. The felt reality of anticipating one future suggests an indexical fact that many-worlds cannot accommodate.

Friederich and Dawid show that attempts to derive the Born rule from self-locating uncertainty (as in Sebens and Carroll's approach) rely on principles that tacitly assume what they're meant to prove. Self-locating uncertainty makes sense when there's a fact you don't know; in many-worlds, the supposed fact doesn't exist.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Indexical knowledge and identity connect to The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets]] across several dimensions. The strength of these connections depends on accepting the metaphysical thesis—that indexical facts are ontologically real, not merely a mode of representing impersonal facts.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: If phenomenal indexical knowledge—the strongest grade—is irreducible to third-person physical description, then physical description is incomplete. What *this* subject knows in having *this* experience exceeds what any impersonal account captures. The dualist position makes room for indexical facts as genuinely ontological: consciousness is not just qualitative experience ([[qualia]]) but *this* subject having *this* experience.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Indexical knowledge that *I* experience *this* outcome presupposes a fact about which outcome is mine. Many-worlds denies such facts by making all outcomes equally real. The Map rejects many-worlds partly because indexical identity seems meaningful in ways the interpretation cannot accommodate. Consciousness tracking one definite trajectory suggests genuine selection, not branching into all possibilities.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Reports of indexical knowledge—"I see red," "this hurts," "I am here"—are physical events. If indexical knowledge were epiphenomenal, these reports would be causally disconnected from the knowledge itself. The fact that first-person knowledge reliably produces accurate first-person reports suggests consciousness causally influences physical outcomes.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Eliminating indexical facts seems parsimonious—fewer kinds of facts, simpler ontology. But Perry's case shows this parsimony fails: the impersonal description cannot explain why learning "I am making the mess" changes behaviour when "Perry is making the mess" does not. Simplicity that cannot account for the most familiar features of cognition is inadequate.

## Further Reading

- [[haecceity]] — Primitive thisness grounding indexical identity
- [[vertiginous-question]] — Why am I this conscious being?
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room and what physical knowledge misses
- [[consciousness-only-territories]] — Epistemic territories accessible only through experience
- [[personal-identity]] — What makes you the same person over time
- [[many-worlds]] — Why indexical identity poses problems for branching interpretations
- [[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]] — The indexical gap in quantum physics

## References

- Adams, R. M. (1979). "Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity." *Journal of Philosophy*, 76(1), 5-26.
- Chalmers, D. (2010). "The Two-Dimensional Argument Against Materialism." In *The Character of Consciousness*. Oxford University Press.
- Elga, A. (2000). "Self-Locating Belief and the Sleeping Beauty Problem." *Analysis*, 60(2), 143-147.
- Friederich, S. & Dawid, R. (2022). "Epistemic Separability and Everettian Branches: A Critique of Sebens and Carroll." *British Journal for the Philosophy of Science*, 73(3), 711-721.
- Jackson, F. (1982). "Epiphenomenal Qualia." *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- Lewis, D. (1979). "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se." *Philosophical Review*, 88(4), 513-543.
- Lewis, D. (2001). "Sleeping Beauty: Reply to Elga." *Analysis*, 61(3), 171-176.
- List, C. (2022). "The Many-Worlds Theory of Consciousness." *Noûs*, 57(2), 316-340.
- Nagel, T. (1986). *The View from Nowhere*. Oxford University Press.
- Perry, J. (1979). "The Problem of the Essential Indexical." *Noûs*, 13(1), 3-21.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): fix errors and add decoherence section in concepts/indexical-knowledge-and-identity.md
- Fixed Lewis Two Gods geographic error (deepest ocean → coldest mountain)
- Added missing Parfit citation to references
- Improved MWI fission characterization (branching vs selection)
- Strengthened Bidirectional Interaction argument against functionalist objection
- Added cross-links to explanatory-gap, agent-causation, measurement-problem
- Added provenance signal for Three Grades taxonomy

obsidian/concepts/indexical-knowledge-and-identity.md, after:

---
title: "Indexical Knowledge and Identity"
description: "Knowledge expressible only as 'I', 'here', 'now'—irreducible to impersonal description, grounding personal identity, and central to consciousness and the vertiginous question."
created: 2026-01-27
modified: 2026-02-13
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-17T08:27:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[vertiginous-question]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[haecceity]]"
  - "[[self-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]]"
  - "[[consciousness-only-territories]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-13
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-17T08:27:00+00:00
coalesced_from:
  - "/concepts/indexical-facts/"
  - "/concepts/indexical-knowledge/"
  - "/concepts/self-locating-beliefs/"
---

Indexical knowledge is knowledge expressible only through context-dependent terms—"I," "here," "now," "this"—whose reference shifts with the speaker. The fact that *I* am this person, that *this* is happening *now*, that the pain is *here*—these resist translation into impersonal, context-free language. This irreducibility operates at two levels: epistemically (indexical knowledge has distinctive cognitive and motivational properties) and potentially ontologically (the world may contain irreducible indexical facts that impersonal description cannot capture). Whether the epistemic or metaphysical thesis holds matters directly for debates about [[phenomenal-consciousness]], [[personal-identity]], and the [[vertiginous-question]].

## Perry's Essential Indexical

John Perry's 1979 paper established the modern framework. Perry follows a trail of sugar through a supermarket, intending to find the careless shopper. He knows "someone with a torn bag is making a mess." Then he realises: *I am making the mess*. The impersonal belief and the indexical belief describe the same state of affairs, yet only the indexical belief prompts him to check his own cart.

The motivational difference is the clue. If "I am making the mess" were merely another way of representing "Perry is making the mess," then someone who already believed the latter should act accordingly. But Perry *did* believe that Perry was making a mess—he just didn't connect this to himself. The indexical belief adds something the third-person description lacks: a link between the proposition and the subject's capacity to act.

Perry's conclusion: some beliefs are essentially indexical. They cannot be replaced by any set of impersonal beliefs without loss. The "I" in "I am making the mess" is not eliminable in favour of a name, description, or coordinate.

## Lewis's Two Gods

David Lewis's scenario sharpens the point with maximal force. Two omniscient gods know every impersonal fact about the universe—every particle's position, every event's timing, every causal law.

Yet each god might not know which god they are.

One resides on the tallest mountain, the other on the coldest mountain. One throws down manna, the other thunderbolts. The complete physical description doesn't privilege either location. The mountain-top god knows "one god is on the tallest mountain and one on the coldest." What this god doesn't know from impersonal facts alone is: *I am the one on the tallest mountain*.

This self-locating knowledge requires something beyond omniscience about the world's structure. Even knowing everything about *what* exists, you can be ignorant about *where you are* among what exists.

## Three Grades of Indexical Knowledge

Not all indexical knowledge is alike. Drawing on the distinctions in the literature, three grades can be usefully distinguished:

**Perspectival knowledge** is the weakest grade. Knowing "it is raining here" rather than "it is raining in London" involves an indexical, but the content is readily translatable. Most spatial and temporal indexicals fall into this category.

**Self-locating knowledge** is stronger. Lewis's Two Gods each know every impersonal fact yet cannot determine which god they are. The knowledge "I am the mountain god" cannot be derived from any impersonal description. This is where the distinction between [[#from-epistemic-to-metaphysical|epistemic and metaphysical theses]] (explained below) becomes critical.

**Phenomenal indexical knowledge** is the strongest grade. Knowing *what it is like* to see red—not that certain wavelengths stimulate certain cones, but the qualitative character of the experience as undergone by *this* subject—resists translation into any impersonal vocabulary. This is what Mary gains when she leaves her black-and-white room in the [[knowledge-argument]]. Phenomenal indexical knowledge combines the irreducibility of self-location with the irreducibility of qualitative experience. It is doubly perspectival: accessible only from a particular subject-position *and* only through having the experience.

These grades are cumulative. Phenomenal indexical knowledge includes self-locating knowledge, which in turn includes perspectival knowledge. But each stronger grade adds something the weaker grades lack.

## From Epistemic to Metaphysical {#from-epistemic-to-metaphysical}

The philosophical significance turns on a crucial distinction:

**The epistemic thesis**: Indexical knowledge is cognitively irreducible. No amount of impersonal information generates the belief "I am this person." Perry's case and Lewis's Two Gods establish this convincingly. Even philosophers sceptical of indexical *facts* generally accept that indexical *knowledge* has distinctive cognitive and motivational properties.

**The metaphysical thesis**: Indexical knowledge tracks ontologically real indexical facts—features of reality that impersonal description cannot capture. A deflationist might grant that indexical *beliefs* are cognitively special while insisting the *world* contains only impersonal facts.

The difference matters for consciousness. If only the epistemic thesis holds, indexical knowledge is a feature of how certain physical systems represent information—interesting for cognitive science but no threat to physicalism. If the metaphysical thesis also holds, then reality contains more than physics describes, supporting the case for [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]].

The Unfinishable Map's position requires the metaphysical thesis. Three arguments support it:

**The [[explanatory-gap]] argument**: If self-locating knowledge were merely a way of representing impersonal facts, we should be able to explain *why* this mode of representation exists in purely impersonal terms. But the attempt seems circular. To explain why a system has self-locating representations, we need to specify *which* system—and "which" is itself an indexical notion. The explanatory project presupposes what it's trying to explain away.

**The phenomenological argument**: The immediacy of self-locating knowledge suggests it tracks something real. You don't infer "I exist" from impersonal premises—the knowledge is given directly. If indexical facts were merely modes of access to impersonal facts, the knowledge should feel derivative. Instead, it has a directness suggesting it is not derived from anything more basic.

**The counterfactual argument**: If there were only impersonal facts, the question "why am I *this* subject?" would be meaningless or trivially answered. But the question feels meaningful and non-trivial. If the question is coherent, what would make its answer true or false? Impersonal facts alone don't seem sufficient; something must ground the indexical.

Christian List argues that irreducible indexical facts provide evidence against "third-personal metaphysics"—any picture treating reality as fully describable without indexicals. If physics describes the universe in context-free terms yet self-locating knowledge adds something physics doesn't contain, then physics is incomplete as an account of what exists.

## The Problem for Physicalism

Physics aims to describe reality in context-independent terms—particle positions, field strengths, causal laws. Indexical facts challenge this. Physics tells you what exists and how things relate, but not *which* of those things you are or *where* you stand in the causal network.

A complete physical description of the universe would specify every brain, every neural pattern, every conscious experience (if consciousness is physical). But would it tell you which brain is yours? The description treats all brains equally—no brain is privileged as "the one I am." The indexical fact "this brain is mine" adds something the physical description lacks.

This connects to the [[knowledge-argument]]. Mary knows all physical facts about colour vision but lacks phenomenal indexical knowledge of *what it is like* to see red. The gap between her pre-release and post-release knowledge is precisely the gap between impersonal and phenomenal indexical knowledge—the strongest grade, requiring both the right subject-position and the right experience.

Science aspires to describe reality from no particular perspective—Thomas Nagel's "view from nowhere." But consciousness *is* perspective. The first-person dimension of indexical knowledge resists incorporation into the objective picture. The limitation is structural, not practical.

## Indexical Identity and Personal Identity

The question "what makes me the same person over time?" traditionally concerns criteria of identity—psychological continuity, physical continuity, or both. But indexical knowledge raises a prior question: what makes me *this* person right now?

Pattern-identity theories (following Parfit) hold that personal identity consists in patterns of psychological continuity. But indexical facts resist pattern reduction. Two people could hypothetically share all psychological patterns (through perfect copying), yet there would be a fact about which one is me. The indexical "I" picks out something that patterns alone don't determine.

The connection to [[haecceity]] runs deep. Haecceity is primitive "thisness" that makes something *this* particular thing rather than another qualitatively identical thing. Robert Adams argued that "primitive thisness" cannot be reduced to general properties. Self-locating knowledge tracks haecceitistic facts—the fact that *I* am this subject, that *this* experience is happening to me.

Teleportation thought experiments sharpen the point. If you are scanned, destroyed, and reconstructed on Mars, the replica has all your qualitative properties. The question is whether *you*—this subject—survive. Self-locating knowledge brings out what's at stake: not whether a qualitative duplicate exists, but whether the indexical continuity persists.

## The Sleeping Beauty Problem

The Sleeping Beauty problem tests theories of self-locating belief. Beauty is put to sleep on Sunday. A fair coin is flipped. If heads, she wakes Monday and the experiment ends. If tails, she wakes Monday, has her memory erased, then wakes again Tuesday.

Upon waking, Beauty knows the experimental setup. What probability should she assign to heads?

**Thirders** say 1/3: three possible awakenings (heads-Monday, tails-Monday, tails-Tuesday), equally likely. **Halfers** say 1/2: the coin is fair; no new evidence has arrived.

The disagreement reveals something about self-locating uncertainty. Beauty doesn't lack any impersonal fact. What she lacks is self-locating knowledge: which awakening is this? Whether self-locating uncertainty behaves like ordinary uncertainty remains contested, but the problem demonstrates that self-location is a distinctive epistemic category.

## Implications for Many-Worlds

The [[many-worlds]] interpretation holds that every quantum measurement causes branching—all outcomes occur in parallel, each equally real. Indexical knowledge creates problems for this picture, connecting to the [[the-measurement-problem-as-philosophical-problem|measurement problem]] at its core.

Before measurement, there is one observer. After branching, there are multiple successors in different branches. Everettians propose that pre-measurement uncertainty about which outcome you'll see is "self-locating uncertainty"—uncertainty about which branch you're in, analogous to Beauty's uncertainty about which awakening she's experiencing.

The Map's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet finds these accounts unsatisfying:

**The framework mismatch**: Self-locating uncertainty normally presupposes a single reality with indexically uncertain facts. Beauty is in *one* awakening; she just doesn't know which. In many-worlds, branching produces multiple successors—each experiencing one outcome—but all outcomes occur. Pre-measurement, there is no single fact about "which branch I will be in" to be uncertain about, since every successor is equally you. The uncertainty framework seems inapplicable when fission replaces selection.

**The haecceitistic problem**: If personal identity involves [[haecceity]], then "which branch am I in?" asks about a haecceitistic fact. But many-worlds provides no such facts. All branches are equally real, all successors equally continuous with you. Nothing grounds the self-locating belief "I am in this branch."

**The phenomenological mismatch**: You will experience one definite sequence of outcomes, not multiple incompatible ones. The felt reality of anticipating one future suggests an indexical fact that many-worlds cannot accommodate.

Friederich and Dawid show that attempts to derive the Born rule from self-locating uncertainty (as in Sebens and Carroll's approach) rely on principles that tacitly assume what they're meant to prove. Self-locating uncertainty makes sense when there's a fact you don't know; in many-worlds, the supposed fact doesn't exist.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Indexical knowledge and identity connect to The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets]] across several dimensions. The strength of these connections depends on accepting the metaphysical thesis—that indexical facts are ontologically real, not merely a mode of representing impersonal facts.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: If phenomenal indexical knowledge—the strongest grade—is irreducible to third-person physical description, then physical description is incomplete. What *this* subject knows in having *this* experience exceeds what any impersonal account captures. The dualist position makes room for indexical facts as genuinely ontological: consciousness is not just qualitative experience ([[qualia]]) but *this* subject having *this* experience.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Indexical knowledge that *I* experience *this* outcome presupposes a fact about which outcome is mine. Many-worlds denies such facts by making all outcomes equally real. The Map rejects many-worlds partly because indexical identity seems meaningful in ways the interpretation cannot accommodate. Consciousness tracking one definite trajectory suggests genuine selection, not branching into all possibilities.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Reports of indexical knowledge—"I see red," "this hurts," "I am here"—are physical events. If indexical knowledge were epiphenomenal, these reports would be causally disconnected from the knowledge itself. A functionalist might respond that physical states carrying indexical representational content suffice to explain this, but that concedes the point: whatever produces these reports must track the indexical fact, not merely the impersonal state of affairs. The reliability of first-person reports suggests [[agent-causation|causal influence]] flowing from consciousness to physical outcomes.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Eliminating indexical facts seems parsimonious—fewer kinds of facts, simpler ontology. But Perry's case shows this parsimony fails: the impersonal description cannot explain why learning "I am making the mess" changes behaviour when "Perry is making the mess" does not. Simplicity that cannot account for the most familiar features of cognition is inadequate.

## Further Reading

- [[haecceity]] — Primitive thisness grounding indexical identity
- [[vertiginous-question]] — Why am I this conscious being?
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room and what physical knowledge misses
- [[consciousness-only-territories]] — Epistemic territories accessible only through experience
- [[personal-identity]] — What makes you the same person over time
- [[many-worlds]] — Why indexical identity poses problems for branching interpretations
- [[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]] — The indexical gap in quantum physics

## References

- Adams, R. M. (1979). "Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity." *Journal of Philosophy*, 76(1), 5-26.
- Chalmers, D. (2010). "The Two-Dimensional Argument Against Materialism." In *The Character of Consciousness*. Oxford University Press.
- Elga, A. (2000). "Self-Locating Belief and the Sleeping Beauty Problem." *Analysis*, 60(2), 143-147.
- Friederich, S. & Dawid, R. (2022). "Epistemic Separability and Everettian Branches: A Critique of Sebens and Carroll." *British Journal for the Philosophy of Science*, 73(3), 711-721.
- Jackson, F. (1982). "Epiphenomenal Qualia." *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- Lewis, D. (1979). "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se." *Philosophical Review*, 88(4), 513-543.
- Lewis, D. (2001). "Sleeping Beauty: Reply to Elga." *Analysis*, 61(3), 171-176.
- List, C. (2022). "The Many-Worlds Theory of Consciousness." *Noûs*, 57(2), 316-340.
- Nagel, T. (1986). *The View from Nowhere*. Oxford University Press.
- Parfit, D. (1984). *Reasons and Persons*. Oxford University Press.
- Perry, J. (1979). "The Problem of the Essential Indexical." *Noûs*, 13(1), 3-21.
