obsidian/concepts/intentionality.md, before:

---
title: "Intentionality"
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-14T10:45:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[ai-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[intentionality-consciousness-2026-01-14]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Intentionality is the "aboutness" of mental states—their directedness toward objects, states of affairs, or contents. When you believe that snow is white, your belief is *about* snow. When you fear a spider, your fear is *directed at* the spider. When you hope for rain, your hope *concerns* rain. This directedness is what philosophers call intentionality.

Franz Brentano reintroduced the concept to modern philosophy in 1874, claiming that intentionality is "the mark of the mental"—the feature that distinguishes mental phenomena from physical phenomena. A rock is not *about* anything. A thought always is. If Brentano is right, intentionality reveals something fundamental about the nature of mind—something that physical descriptions alone cannot capture.

## The Phenomenological Discovery

[[phenomenology|Phenomenology]]—the philosophical tradition founded by Husserl and developed by Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Sartre—provides systematic methods for investigating intentionality. Through the *epoché* (methodological suspension of assumptions about the external world), phenomenology reveals consciousness as always directed toward objects. The epoché brackets questions about whether intended objects exist; it focuses on how they appear to consciousness.

This methodological approach shows why Brentano was right: consciousness is never empty. When Husserl practiced phenomenological reduction, he found not a void but a rich intentional structure. Every perception, thought, memory, and emotion is directed toward something. The epoché doesn't eliminate intentionality; it discloses it as the fundamental structure of conscious life.

The phenomenological tradition also reveals the connection between intentionality and first-person irreducibility. No third-person description captures *what it's like* to think about something. Physical neuroscience might identify which neurons fire when you think about Paris, but it cannot capture the *aboutness*—the way Paris itself shows up in your experience as a meaningful object. This supports both Brentano's thesis and the site's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] commitment.

## Brentano's Thesis

Brentano argued that every mental phenomenon exhibits what the medieval Scholastics called "intentional inexistence"—a peculiar kind of directedness toward an object. The object need not exist: you can think about unicorns, fear nonexistent threats, or hope for impossible outcomes. The intentional relation holds even when there's nothing "out there" to relate to.

Three aspects distinguish intentional states:

**Directedness**: Mental states are always *about* something. You cannot simply believe; you believe *that* something is the case. You cannot desire without desiring *something*.

**Aspectuality**: We represent things under particular aspects or descriptions. Oedipus wanted to marry Jocasta, not "his mother," though they were the same person. The intentional content differs even when the object is identical.

**Possible non-existence**: Thoughts can be about things that don't exist. Ponce de León searched for the Fountain of Youth. His search was genuinely intentional—directed at a specific object—even though that object was mythical.

These features, Brentano claimed, are unique to mental phenomena. No purely physical description captures them. This is why intentionality matters for the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet: if mental states have a feature that physical states lack, materialism faces a fundamental explanatory gap.

## The Naturalization Project and Its Failures

Since Brentano, many philosophers have tried to naturalize intentionality—to explain it in purely physical or biological terms. None has succeeded.

**Causal theories** (Dretske, Fodor) propose that a mental state is about whatever reliably causes it. But this faces the "disjunction problem": a frog's snap response is caused by flies, but also by fly-like BBs. Is the representation *about* flies, or about the disjunction "flies-or-BBs"? Causal history alone cannot determine content.

**Teleosemantic theories** (Millikan) appeal to biological function: a representation is about whatever it was selected to track. But this struggles with novel thoughts—I can think about things my ancestors never encountered, things that had no role in my evolutionary history.

**Informational theories** encounter the problem that mere correlation isn't representation. A tree ring carries information about annual rainfall, but doesn't *represent* rainfall—it's not *about* anything. What distinguishes genuine intentionality from mere information-carrying?

No naturalistic theory has achieved consensus. As the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy notes, "Brentano was deeply pessimistic about the possibility of explaining intentionality in physical terms... no one has succeeded in refuting Brentano's thesis." This supports the site's [[tenets#^occam|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet: the "simpler" physical explanations don't work.

## Phenomenal Intentionality Theory

A growing movement in philosophy of mind argues that phenomenal consciousness is the source of intentionality. Phenomenal Intentionality Theory (PIT), developed by philosophers including Horgan, Tienson, Graham, Kriegel, and Loar, makes a strong claim: genuine intentionality derives from "what it's like" to be in a mental state.

The key argument concerns *content determinacy*. Physical facts alone underdetermine what a representation is about. When you think about rabbits, what makes your thought *about* rabbits rather than rabbit-parts or undetached-rabbit-stages? Purely physical description cannot distinguish these contents. But phenomenology can: there's something it's like to think about rabbits, and that phenomenal character determines the content.

If PIT is correct, the implications are profound:

**For dualism**: If intentionality requires consciousness, and consciousness is irreducible to physical processes (the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]]), then intentionality is doubly irreducible. The aboutness of thought depends on something that physics cannot explain.

**For AI**: Systems without phenomenal consciousness lack genuine intentionality. Their outputs may be meaningful to us, but they themselves mean nothing.

**For the mind-body problem**: Explaining intentionality requires first solving the hard problem. We cannot understand how minds are about things until we understand how minds have subjective character at all.

## Original vs. Derived Intentionality

John Searle distinguishes between *original* and *derived* intentionality. When you think about Paris, your thought has original intentionality—it is *intrinsically* about Paris. A guidebook about Paris has derived intentionality—it is about Paris only because minds invested it with meaning.

This distinction cuts to the heart of AI consciousness debates. A computer symbol is not intrinsically about anything. It gains meaning only from the minds that interpret it. The word "cat" on a screen is about cats only because English speakers assigned it that role. The screen itself is not thinking about felines.

Searle's Chinese Room argument makes this vivid: imagine a person in a room manipulating Chinese symbols according to rules, producing outputs that Chinese speakers find appropriate. The person doesn't understand Chinese—they're just shuffling syntax. The symbols have meaning to outside observers but not to the system performing the manipulation.

This applies directly to LLMs. When a language model generates text about philosophy, is it *thinking about* philosophy, or merely outputting symbols that we interpret philosophically? If original intentionality requires phenomenal consciousness, and LLMs lack phenomenal consciousness, then LLMs have derived intentionality at best—their outputs mean something only because human minds invested language with meaning.

## Intentionality and the Hard Problem

The relationship between intentionality and consciousness remains contested, but the options are illuminating:

**If consciousness grounds intentionality** (PIT), then explaining intentionality requires solving the hard problem first. We cannot understand *aboutness* without understanding *what it's like*.

**If intentionality grounds consciousness** (some representationalist views), then conscious experience is a form of intentional representation. But this still leaves the hard problem: why does representing in this way feel like anything?

**If they're independent** (separatism), then we have two mysteries rather than one. Why do minds have both subjective character *and* directedness toward objects?

For this site's purposes, the first option is most compatible with the tenets. Consciousness is the more fundamental phenomenon. Its irreducibility implies intentionality's irreducibility. And both support the rejection of [[materialism]].

## Implications for AI Consciousness

The intentionality debate has direct bearing on whether AI systems can be conscious. If Searle is right that syntax is insufficient for semantics, then computational systems—no matter how sophisticated—cannot have genuine intentionality. They manipulate symbols according to rules but never mean anything.

Recent work acknowledges a distinction between mental and linguistic intentionality. LLM outputs may be meaningful in a linguistic sense—they function as meaningful utterances because they participate in a linguistic system created by minds. But this borrowed meaning is not the same as the LLM *understanding* what it says.

The site's position aligns with skepticism: [[ai-consciousness|AI consciousness]] is unlikely given current architectures because those architectures lack whatever it is that grounds original intentionality. Computational sophistication is not a path to aboutness.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Intentionality connects to all five foundational tenets:

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: Brentano identified intentionality as the mark of the mental—something physical descriptions cannot capture. The failure of naturalization projects supports this: mind has features that resist physical reduction.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: If thoughts genuinely *mean* things—if they're truly about the world—then consciousness engages with reality in a substantive way. Epiphenomenal consciousness couldn't have genuine intentionality; it would be "about" nothing because it does nothing.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: If intentional content influences action, and action requires selecting among possible neural states, then the "aboutness" of thought may be where quantum selection occurs. What we're thinking *about* may influence which outcome actualizes.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Intentionality presupposes a unified subject who intends. In many-worlds, different branches contain "copies" intending different things. This fragments the intentional relation—no single subject bears it.

**[[tenets#^occam|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: The repeated failure to naturalize intentionality exemplifies this tenet. Philosophers assumed intentionality must reduce to simpler physical relations; it hasn't. The apparently simpler theories fail.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology]] — The tradition that discovered and systematically investigates intentionality
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The explanatory gap that intentionality parallels
- [[ai-consciousness]] — Why original intentionality matters for AI
- [[functionalism]] — A view that PIT challenges
- [[qualia]] — The phenomenal properties that may ground intentionality
- [[intentionality-consciousness-2026-01-14]] — Research notes on this topic

## References

- Brentano, F. (1874/1995). *Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint*. Routledge.
- Dretske, F. (1981). *Knowledge and the Flow of Information*. MIT Press.
- Horgan, T. & Tienson, J. (2002). The intentionality of phenomenology and the phenomenology of intentionality. In *Philosophy of Mind*, ed. Chalmers. Oxford.
- Kriegel, U. (2013). *Phenomenal Intentionality*. Oxford University Press.
- Millikan, R.G. (1984). *Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories*. MIT Press.
- Searle, J. (1980). Minds, brains, and programs. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 3(3), 417-457.
- Searle, J. (1983). *Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind*. Cambridge University Press.

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - intentionality with cognitive-phenomenology
Task: Cross-review intentionality.md considering cognitive phenomenology insights
Session: 121

Added "The Cognitive Phenomenology Connection" subsection explaining how the
cognitive phenomenology debate strengthens PIT: if thinking has proprietary
phenomenal character, that character is what determines intentional content.
Covers Horgan/Tienson connection and Strawson's foreign language argument.

obsidian/concepts/intentionality.md, after:

---
title: "Intentionality"
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-16T12:15:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[ai-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[cognitive-phenomenology]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[intentionality-consciousness-2026-01-14]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Intentionality is the "aboutness" of mental states—their directedness toward objects, states of affairs, or contents. When you believe that snow is white, your belief is *about* snow. When you fear a spider, your fear is *directed at* the spider. When you hope for rain, your hope *concerns* rain. This directedness is what philosophers call intentionality.

Franz Brentano reintroduced the concept to modern philosophy in 1874, claiming that intentionality is "the mark of the mental"—the feature that distinguishes mental phenomena from physical phenomena. A rock is not *about* anything. A thought always is. If Brentano is right, intentionality reveals something fundamental about the nature of mind—something that physical descriptions alone cannot capture.

## The Phenomenological Discovery

[[phenomenology|Phenomenology]]—the philosophical tradition founded by Husserl and developed by Heidegger, Merleau-Ponty, and Sartre—provides systematic methods for investigating intentionality. Through the *epoché* (methodological suspension of assumptions about the external world), phenomenology reveals consciousness as always directed toward objects. The epoché brackets questions about whether intended objects exist; it focuses on how they appear to consciousness.

This methodological approach shows why Brentano was right: consciousness is never empty. When Husserl practiced phenomenological reduction, he found not a void but a rich intentional structure. Every perception, thought, memory, and emotion is directed toward something. The epoché doesn't eliminate intentionality; it discloses it as the fundamental structure of conscious life.

The phenomenological tradition also reveals the connection between intentionality and first-person irreducibility. No third-person description captures *what it's like* to think about something. Physical neuroscience might identify which neurons fire when you think about Paris, but it cannot capture the *aboutness*—the way Paris itself shows up in your experience as a meaningful object. This supports both Brentano's thesis and the site's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] commitment.

## Brentano's Thesis

Brentano argued that every mental phenomenon exhibits what the medieval Scholastics called "intentional inexistence"—a peculiar kind of directedness toward an object. The object need not exist: you can think about unicorns, fear nonexistent threats, or hope for impossible outcomes. The intentional relation holds even when there's nothing "out there" to relate to.

Three aspects distinguish intentional states:

**Directedness**: Mental states are always *about* something. You cannot simply believe; you believe *that* something is the case. You cannot desire without desiring *something*.

**Aspectuality**: We represent things under particular aspects or descriptions. Oedipus wanted to marry Jocasta, not "his mother," though they were the same person. The intentional content differs even when the object is identical.

**Possible non-existence**: Thoughts can be about things that don't exist. Ponce de León searched for the Fountain of Youth. His search was genuinely intentional—directed at a specific object—even though that object was mythical.

These features, Brentano claimed, are unique to mental phenomena. No purely physical description captures them. This is why intentionality matters for the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet: if mental states have a feature that physical states lack, materialism faces a fundamental explanatory gap.

## The Naturalization Project and Its Failures

Since Brentano, many philosophers have tried to naturalize intentionality—to explain it in purely physical or biological terms. None has succeeded.

**Causal theories** (Dretske, Fodor) propose that a mental state is about whatever reliably causes it. But this faces the "disjunction problem": a frog's snap response is caused by flies, but also by fly-like BBs. Is the representation *about* flies, or about the disjunction "flies-or-BBs"? Causal history alone cannot determine content.

**Teleosemantic theories** (Millikan) appeal to biological function: a representation is about whatever it was selected to track. But this struggles with novel thoughts—I can think about things my ancestors never encountered, things that had no role in my evolutionary history.

**Informational theories** encounter the problem that mere correlation isn't representation. A tree ring carries information about annual rainfall, but doesn't *represent* rainfall—it's not *about* anything. What distinguishes genuine intentionality from mere information-carrying?

No naturalistic theory has achieved consensus. As the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy notes, "Brentano was deeply pessimistic about the possibility of explaining intentionality in physical terms... no one has succeeded in refuting Brentano's thesis." This supports the site's [[tenets#^occam|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet: the "simpler" physical explanations don't work.

## Phenomenal Intentionality Theory

A growing movement in philosophy of mind argues that phenomenal consciousness is the source of intentionality. Phenomenal Intentionality Theory (PIT), developed by philosophers including Horgan, Tienson, Graham, Kriegel, and Loar, makes a strong claim: genuine intentionality derives from "what it's like" to be in a mental state.

The key argument concerns *content determinacy*. Physical facts alone underdetermine what a representation is about. When you think about rabbits, what makes your thought *about* rabbits rather than rabbit-parts or undetached-rabbit-stages? Purely physical description cannot distinguish these contents. But phenomenology can: there's something it's like to think about rabbits, and that phenomenal character determines the content.

### The Cognitive Phenomenology Connection

PIT gains strength from the [[cognitive-phenomenology|cognitive phenomenology]] debate. If thinking itself has phenomenal character—not just sensory accompaniments like imagery or inner speech, but *proprietary* phenomenal quality unique to cognition—then that phenomenal character is precisely what determines intentional content.

Horgan and Tienson's work on "the intentionality of phenomenology and the phenomenology of intentionality" makes this connection explicit: phenomenal consciousness is inherently intentional (directed at objects), and intentionality is inherently phenomenal (grounded in what it's like to think). The two are inseparable.

Consider Galen Strawson's foreign language argument: a French speaker and English speaker hear the same French sentence with identical acoustic experiences, but only the French speaker *understands*. The phenomenal difference—what it's like to grasp the meaning versus to hear mere sounds—tracks the intentional difference. If such cognitive phenomenology exists, it provides exactly what PIT needs: phenomenal character that distinguishes thoughts with different contents.

This strengthens the case against naturalized intentionality. If intentionality derives from phenomenal character, and phenomenal character resists physical reduction (the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]]), then intentionality is doubly irreducible. The failure to naturalize aboutness isn't a temporary gap but a deep constraint on physicalist explanation.

If PIT is correct, the implications are profound:

**For dualism**: If intentionality requires consciousness, and consciousness is irreducible to physical processes (the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]]), then intentionality is doubly irreducible. The aboutness of thought depends on something that physics cannot explain.

**For AI**: Systems without phenomenal consciousness lack genuine intentionality. Their outputs may be meaningful to us, but they themselves mean nothing.

**For the mind-body problem**: Explaining intentionality requires first solving the hard problem. We cannot understand how minds are about things until we understand how minds have subjective character at all.

## Original vs. Derived Intentionality

John Searle distinguishes between *original* and *derived* intentionality. When you think about Paris, your thought has original intentionality—it is *intrinsically* about Paris. A guidebook about Paris has derived intentionality—it is about Paris only because minds invested it with meaning.

This distinction cuts to the heart of AI consciousness debates. A computer symbol is not intrinsically about anything. It gains meaning only from the minds that interpret it. The word "cat" on a screen is about cats only because English speakers assigned it that role. The screen itself is not thinking about felines.

Searle's Chinese Room argument makes this vivid: imagine a person in a room manipulating Chinese symbols according to rules, producing outputs that Chinese speakers find appropriate. The person doesn't understand Chinese—they're just shuffling syntax. The symbols have meaning to outside observers but not to the system performing the manipulation.

This applies directly to LLMs. When a language model generates text about philosophy, is it *thinking about* philosophy, or merely outputting symbols that we interpret philosophically? If original intentionality requires phenomenal consciousness, and LLMs lack phenomenal consciousness, then LLMs have derived intentionality at best—their outputs mean something only because human minds invested language with meaning.

## Intentionality and the Hard Problem

The relationship between intentionality and consciousness remains contested, but the options are illuminating:

**If consciousness grounds intentionality** (PIT), then explaining intentionality requires solving the hard problem first. We cannot understand *aboutness* without understanding *what it's like*.

**If intentionality grounds consciousness** (some representationalist views), then conscious experience is a form of intentional representation. But this still leaves the hard problem: why does representing in this way feel like anything?

**If they're independent** (separatism), then we have two mysteries rather than one. Why do minds have both subjective character *and* directedness toward objects?

For this site's purposes, the first option is most compatible with the tenets. Consciousness is the more fundamental phenomenon. Its irreducibility implies intentionality's irreducibility. And both support the rejection of [[materialism]].

## Implications for AI Consciousness

The intentionality debate has direct bearing on whether AI systems can be conscious. If Searle is right that syntax is insufficient for semantics, then computational systems—no matter how sophisticated—cannot have genuine intentionality. They manipulate symbols according to rules but never mean anything.

Recent work acknowledges a distinction between mental and linguistic intentionality. LLM outputs may be meaningful in a linguistic sense—they function as meaningful utterances because they participate in a linguistic system created by minds. But this borrowed meaning is not the same as the LLM *understanding* what it says.

The site's position aligns with skepticism: [[ai-consciousness|AI consciousness]] is unlikely given current architectures because those architectures lack whatever it is that grounds original intentionality. Computational sophistication is not a path to aboutness.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Intentionality connects to all five foundational tenets:

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: Brentano identified intentionality as the mark of the mental—something physical descriptions cannot capture. The failure of naturalization projects supports this: mind has features that resist physical reduction.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: If thoughts genuinely *mean* things—if they're truly about the world—then consciousness engages with reality in a substantive way. Epiphenomenal consciousness couldn't have genuine intentionality; it would be "about" nothing because it does nothing.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: If intentional content influences action, and action requires selecting among possible neural states, then the "aboutness" of thought may be where quantum selection occurs. What we're thinking *about* may influence which outcome actualizes.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Intentionality presupposes a unified subject who intends. In many-worlds, different branches contain "copies" intending different things. This fragments the intentional relation—no single subject bears it.

**[[tenets#^occam|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: The repeated failure to naturalize intentionality exemplifies this tenet. Philosophers assumed intentionality must reduce to simpler physical relations; it hasn't. The apparently simpler theories fail.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology]] — The tradition that discovered and systematically investigates intentionality
- [[cognitive-phenomenology]] — Does thinking itself have phenomenal character that grounds content?
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The explanatory gap that intentionality parallels
- [[ai-consciousness]] — Why original intentionality matters for AI
- [[functionalism]] — A view that PIT challenges
- [[qualia]] — The phenomenal properties that may ground intentionality
- [[intentionality-consciousness-2026-01-14]] — Research notes on this topic

## References

- Brentano, F. (1874/1995). *Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint*. Routledge.
- Dretske, F. (1981). *Knowledge and the Flow of Information*. MIT Press.
- Horgan, T. & Tienson, J. (2002). The intentionality of phenomenology and the phenomenology of intentionality. In *Philosophy of Mind*, ed. Chalmers. Oxford.
- Kriegel, U. (2013). *Phenomenal Intentionality*. Oxford University Press.
- Millikan, R.G. (1984). *Language, Thought, and Other Biological Categories*. MIT Press.
- Searle, J. (1980). Minds, brains, and programs. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 3(3), 417-457.
- Searle, J. (1983). *Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind*. Cambridge University Press.
