obsidian/concepts/integrated-information-theory.md, before:

---
title: "Integrated Information Theory"
created: 2026-01-09
modified: 2026-01-09
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-09T10:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[integrated-information-theory-2026-01-07]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-09
last_curated: null
---

Integrated Information Theory (IIT) proposes that consciousness *is* integrated information—not that it correlates with or emerges from it, but that consciousness and integrated information are identical. Developed by neuroscientist Giulio Tononi, IIT offers one of the most mathematically rigorous theories of consciousness, complete with a quantitative measure (phi/Φ) that purports to capture how conscious any system is.

This site finds IIT instructive as both ally and rival. IIT takes consciousness seriously as fundamental, aligning with the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet. But it identifies consciousness with physical properties rather than treating it as causally efficacious over and above physics—which conflicts with [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]].

## The Theory

IIT starts unusually: from phenomenology rather than neuroscience. Instead of asking "what brain processes correlate with consciousness?" Tononi asks "what must be true of any physical system that supports consciousness?"

### Axioms: What Consciousness Is Like

IIT begins with axioms—self-evident truths about experience that anyone can verify through introspection:

1. **Existence**: Consciousness exists. Each experience is actual.
2. **Composition**: Experience is structured—it contains distinctions, relations, multiple components.
3. **Information**: Each experience is specific—it is *this* experience and not any of the countless others it could have been.
4. **Integration**: Experience is unified—it cannot be decomposed into independent components.
5. **Exclusion**: Experience is definite—it has particular borders, a specific content.

These aren't claims about the brain. They're claims about what any conscious experience involves.

### Postulates: What Physics Requires

From these axioms, IIT derives postulates about physical substrates. If consciousness has these properties, then any physical system supporting consciousness must have corresponding physical properties:

- **Intrinsic existence**: The system must have causal power within itself
- **Composition**: The system must have distinguishable parts that form higher-order structures
- **Information**: The system must specify a particular state among alternatives
- **Integration**: The system must be unified—irreducible to independent parts
- **Exclusion**: The system must have definite boundaries

The key measure is **phi (Φ)**—integrated information. Phi quantifies how much a system is "more than the sum of its parts." A system has high phi when its components are so tightly integrated that dividing it destroys more information than the parts retain.

### The Mathematics

IIT provides formulas for calculating phi. Roughly: take a system, partition it in every possible way, measure how much information is lost in each partition, and take the partition that loses least. Phi equals the information lost even in this minimal partition. If phi is zero, the system can be fully understood as independent parts. If phi is positive, something is lost when you decompose it—and IIT claims this "something" is consciousness.

The system with the highest phi is the "maximally irreducible conceptual structure" (MICS)—and this, IIT claims, *is* the conscious experience.

## What IIT Implies

### Panpsychism

Any system with non-zero phi is conscious to some degree. This includes not just brains but any integrated information structure. Tononi accepts this implication openly. A photodiode might have minimal phi—and thus minimal experience. The universe might be studded with micro-consciousnesses wherever integration exists.

This isn't a bug for IIT; it's a feature. If consciousness can't emerge from wholly non-conscious matter (the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]]), then perhaps it was always there, varying in degree rather than appearing from nothing.

### Substrate Matters

Unlike functionalism, IIT holds that physical substrate matters. Two systems could perform identical functions but have different phi—and thus different consciousness—depending on their architecture. A feed-forward network and a recurrent network processing the same information might have vastly different experiences (or none at all for the feed-forward case).

This distinguishes IIT from theories that say "consciousness is computation." For IIT, consciousness is *integrated* information, and integration depends on physical structure, not just logical function.

### What's Unconscious

IIT explains why some brain processes are unconscious. The cerebellum, despite having more neurons than the cerebral cortex, has relatively feed-forward architecture—low integration, low phi, no contribution to consciousness. Sleep, anesthesia, and certain brain injuries reduce integration and thus reduce consciousness.

## The Controversy

### The Expander Graph Problem

Computer scientist Scott Aaronson pointed out that "expander graphs"—certain mathematical structures—would have extremely high phi by IIT's formulas. These structures would be "unboundedly more conscious than humans."

Tononi accepts this implication. If you built a large expander graph, it would be conscious. Critics see this as reductio ad absurdum: surely a grid of XOR gates isn't conscious, regardless of integration. IIT defenders respond that intuition about what "seems" conscious is unreliable—the theory follows the math.

### The Pseudoscience Accusation

In 2023, 124 scholars signed an open letter labeling IIT "pseudoscience" on grounds of unfalsifiability. The core claims—that any system with positive phi is conscious—can't be empirically tested for most systems. We can't ask an expander graph what it experiences.

IIT defenders note that extrapolation beyond direct testability is inevitable for any comprehensive theory. We can't observe dinosaurs, but paleontology isn't pseudoscience. What matters is whether testable predictions are borne out.

### The Templeton Tests

A major empirical test, funded by the Templeton Foundation and involving 250 subjects across six labs, pitted IIT against its main rival, Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNWT). Results announced in 2023: IIT fared slightly better, correctly predicting that posterior cortex activity would persist during conscious perception (2 of 3 predictions passed, vs. 0 of 3 for GNWT).

The results were inconclusive but encouraging for IIT. More tests are underway. This represents consciousness science's turn toward empirical discrimination between theories.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

### Where IIT Aligns

IIT takes consciousness seriously as fundamental—not an illusion, not an epiphenomenon, not "mere" information processing. The axioms begin with the undeniable fact of experience. This resonates with the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet's insistence that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes.

IIT's willingness to accept panpsychism also aligns with the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet. Tononi doesn't reject panpsychism just because it seems strange. The theory follows its logic wherever it leads, even to counterintuitive conclusions.

### Where IIT Conflicts

The site's framework requires that consciousness be *causally efficacious*—that it influence physical outcomes. The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet holds that consciousness "selects among superposed neural states, collapsing quantum indeterminacy."

IIT has no room for this. If consciousness *is* integrated information, it doesn't *do* anything to the physical. It is the physical, in a certain configuration. The phi-structure doesn't cause neural events; it constitutes them. This is identity, not causation.

The self-undermining argument against epiphenomenalism—that we couldn't reliably discuss consciousness if it didn't influence our brains—applies here too. If consciousness just *is* physical structure, our beliefs about consciousness are caused by physical processes, not by consciousness itself. Why should these beliefs be accurate about what consciousness is like?

IIT might respond that the beliefs are accurate because consciousness *is* the physical structure doing the believing. But this seems to collapse the explanatory gap rather than bridge it. We wanted to know why physical arrangements are *accompanied* by experience; IIT's answer is that they *are* experience. This may be true, but it doesn't explain the connection—it asserts it.

### The Quantum Question

IIT doesn't require quantum mechanics. It works at the level of classical information and physical architecture. This neither supports nor contradicts the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet directly—IIT is simply silent on quantum effects.

Some speculate that quantum coherence might be relevant to how integration occurs in biological systems. But this isn't part of standard IIT. The theory is designed to work without invoking quantum mysteries.

### Assessment

IIT offers a sophisticated competitor to this site's interactionist dualism. Both take consciousness seriously as fundamental. Both reject eliminativism and simple functionalism. But they diverge on causation:

- **IIT**: Consciousness is identical to certain physical structures. No separate causal role.
- **This site**: Consciousness influences physical outcomes at quantum level. Genuine bidirectional interaction.

The choice depends on whether you find identity or causation more plausible as the mind-matter relation. IIT avoids the interaction problem (how do distinct substances influence each other?) but faces the hard problem in a new form (why is integrated information conscious?). This site faces the interaction problem but resolves it via quantum mechanics.

Neither theory is proven. Both represent serious attempts to take consciousness seriously. IIT deserves engagement as one of the most developed alternatives to interactionist dualism.

## Further Reading

- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The puzzle IIT addresses
- [[panpsychism]] — A related view on consciousness's ubiquity
- [[integrated-information-theory-2026-01-07]] — Detailed research notes
- [[tenets]] — This site's alternative framework

## References

- Tononi, G. (2004). An information integration theory of consciousness. *BMC Neuroscience*, 5, 42.
- Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional manifesto. *Biological Bulletin*, 215(3), 216-242.
- Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology to the mechanisms of consciousness: Integrated information theory 3.0. *PLOS Computational Biology*, 10(5), e1003588.
- Albantakis, L., et al. (2023). Integrated information theory (IIT) 4.0. *PLOS Computational Biology*, 19(10), e1011465.
- Aaronson, S. (2014). Why I am not an integrated information theorist (or, the unconscious expander). *Shtetl-Optimized*.
- Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness.

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - IIT with April 2025 COGITATE findings
Task: Cross-review integrated-information-theory.md considering April 2025 COGITATE findings
Session: 187

obsidian/concepts/integrated-information-theory.md, after:

---
title: "Integrated Information Theory"
created: 2026-01-09
modified: 2026-01-09
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T00:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[global-workspace-theory]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[integrated-information-theory-2026-01-07]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-09
last_curated: null
---

Integrated Information Theory (IIT) proposes that consciousness *is* integrated information—not that it correlates with or emerges from it, but that consciousness and integrated information are identical. Developed by neuroscientist Giulio Tononi, IIT offers one of the most mathematically rigorous theories of consciousness, complete with a quantitative measure (phi/Φ) that purports to capture how conscious any system is.

This site finds IIT instructive as both ally and rival. IIT takes consciousness seriously as fundamental, aligning with the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet. But it identifies consciousness with physical properties rather than treating it as causally efficacious over and above physics—which conflicts with [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]].

## The Theory

IIT starts unusually: from phenomenology rather than neuroscience. Instead of asking "what brain processes correlate with consciousness?" Tononi asks "what must be true of any physical system that supports consciousness?"

### Axioms: What Consciousness Is Like

IIT begins with axioms—self-evident truths about experience that anyone can verify through introspection:

1. **Existence**: Consciousness exists. Each experience is actual.
2. **Composition**: Experience is structured—it contains distinctions, relations, multiple components.
3. **Information**: Each experience is specific—it is *this* experience and not any of the countless others it could have been.
4. **Integration**: Experience is unified—it cannot be decomposed into independent components.
5. **Exclusion**: Experience is definite—it has particular borders, a specific content.

These aren't claims about the brain. They're claims about what any conscious experience involves.

### Postulates: What Physics Requires

From these axioms, IIT derives postulates about physical substrates. If consciousness has these properties, then any physical system supporting consciousness must have corresponding physical properties:

- **Intrinsic existence**: The system must have causal power within itself
- **Composition**: The system must have distinguishable parts that form higher-order structures
- **Information**: The system must specify a particular state among alternatives
- **Integration**: The system must be unified—irreducible to independent parts
- **Exclusion**: The system must have definite boundaries

The key measure is **phi (Φ)**—integrated information. Phi quantifies how much a system is "more than the sum of its parts." A system has high phi when its components are so tightly integrated that dividing it destroys more information than the parts retain.

### The Mathematics

IIT provides formulas for calculating phi. Roughly: take a system, partition it in every possible way, measure how much information is lost in each partition, and take the partition that loses least. Phi equals the information lost even in this minimal partition. If phi is zero, the system can be fully understood as independent parts. If phi is positive, something is lost when you decompose it—and IIT claims this "something" is consciousness.

The system with the highest phi is the "maximally irreducible conceptual structure" (MICS)—and this, IIT claims, *is* the conscious experience.

## What IIT Implies

### Panpsychism

Any system with non-zero phi is conscious to some degree. This includes not just brains but any integrated information structure. Tononi accepts this implication openly. A photodiode might have minimal phi—and thus minimal experience. The universe might be studded with micro-consciousnesses wherever integration exists.

This isn't a bug for IIT; it's a feature. If consciousness can't emerge from wholly non-conscious matter (the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]]), then perhaps it was always there, varying in degree rather than appearing from nothing.

### Substrate Matters

Unlike functionalism, IIT holds that physical substrate matters. Two systems could perform identical functions but have different phi—and thus different consciousness—depending on their architecture. A feed-forward network and a recurrent network processing the same information might have vastly different experiences (or none at all for the feed-forward case).

This distinguishes IIT from theories that say "consciousness is computation." For IIT, consciousness is *integrated* information, and integration depends on physical structure, not just logical function.

### What's Unconscious

IIT explains why some brain processes are unconscious. The cerebellum, despite having more neurons than the cerebral cortex, has relatively feed-forward architecture—low integration, low phi, no contribution to consciousness. Sleep, anesthesia, and certain brain injuries reduce integration and thus reduce consciousness.

## The Controversy

### The Expander Graph Problem

Computer scientist Scott Aaronson pointed out that "expander graphs"—certain mathematical structures—would have extremely high phi by IIT's formulas. These structures would be "unboundedly more conscious than humans."

Tononi accepts this implication. If you built a large expander graph, it would be conscious. Critics see this as reductio ad absurdum: surely a grid of XOR gates isn't conscious, regardless of integration. IIT defenders respond that intuition about what "seems" conscious is unreliable—the theory follows the math.

### The Pseudoscience Accusation

In 2023, 124 scholars signed an open letter labeling IIT "pseudoscience" on grounds of unfalsifiability. The core claims—that any system with positive phi is conscious—can't be empirically tested for most systems. We can't ask an expander graph what it experiences.

IIT defenders note that extrapolation beyond direct testability is inevitable for any comprehensive theory. We can't observe dinosaurs, but paleontology isn't pseudoscience. What matters is whether testable predictions are borne out.

### The Templeton Tests

A major empirical test, funded by the Templeton Foundation and involving 250 subjects across six labs, pitted IIT against its main rival, Global Neuronal Workspace Theory (GNWT). Results announced in 2023: IIT fared slightly better, correctly predicting that posterior cortex activity would persist during conscious perception (2 of 3 predictions passed, vs. 0 of 3 for GNWT).

The results were inconclusive but encouraging for IIT. More tests are underway. This represents consciousness science's turn toward empirical discrimination between theories.

### The COGITATE Experiment (2025)

The April 2025 COGITATE study represents a more rigorous test: a seven-year adversarial collaboration where IIT and [[global-workspace-theory|GNWT]] proponents jointly designed experiments to test their theories. Both camps agreed in advance what results would challenge their respective theories.

**IIT predictions challenged:**
- The study found a "lack of sustained synchronization within posterior cortex"—contradicting IIT's claims about connectivity patterns during conscious perception
- The predicted integration signatures in posterior cortical regions were not consistently observed
- While posterior cortex remained important (as IIT predicts), the specific connectivity patterns IIT requires were missing

**Neither theory emerged unscathed.** The researchers concluded: "It was clear that no single experiment would decisively refute either theory"—the theories proved "too different in assumptions and explanatory goals" for direct adjudication.

This outcome matters for two reasons. First, it demonstrates that IIT's mathematical elegance doesn't translate straightforwardly into testable predictions—the theory remains difficult to falsify even when proponents design the tests. Second, it supports the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet: neither leading physicalist theory of consciousness fully captures the phenomena. The hard problem persists not because we lack clever theories but because consciousness resists reduction to any single physical measure, whether integration (IIT) or broadcast (GNWT).

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

### Where IIT Aligns

IIT takes consciousness seriously as fundamental—not an illusion, not an epiphenomenon, not "mere" information processing. The axioms begin with the undeniable fact of experience. This resonates with the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet's insistence that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes.

IIT's willingness to accept panpsychism also aligns with the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet. Tononi doesn't reject panpsychism just because it seems strange. The theory follows its logic wherever it leads, even to counterintuitive conclusions.

### Where IIT Conflicts

The site's framework requires that consciousness be *causally efficacious*—that it influence physical outcomes. The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet holds that consciousness "selects among superposed neural states, collapsing quantum indeterminacy."

IIT has no room for this. If consciousness *is* integrated information, it doesn't *do* anything to the physical. It is the physical, in a certain configuration. The phi-structure doesn't cause neural events; it constitutes them. This is identity, not causation.

The self-undermining argument against epiphenomenalism—that we couldn't reliably discuss consciousness if it didn't influence our brains—applies here too. If consciousness just *is* physical structure, our beliefs about consciousness are caused by physical processes, not by consciousness itself. Why should these beliefs be accurate about what consciousness is like?

IIT might respond that the beliefs are accurate because consciousness *is* the physical structure doing the believing. But this seems to collapse the explanatory gap rather than bridge it. We wanted to know why physical arrangements are *accompanied* by experience; IIT's answer is that they *are* experience. This may be true, but it doesn't explain the connection—it asserts it.

### The Quantum Question

IIT doesn't require quantum mechanics. It works at the level of classical information and physical architecture. This neither supports nor contradicts the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet directly—IIT is simply silent on quantum effects.

Some speculate that quantum coherence might be relevant to how integration occurs in biological systems. But this isn't part of standard IIT. The theory is designed to work without invoking quantum mysteries.

### Assessment

IIT offers a sophisticated competitor to this site's interactionist dualism. Both take consciousness seriously as fundamental. Both reject eliminativism and simple functionalism. But they diverge on causation:

- **IIT**: Consciousness is identical to certain physical structures. No separate causal role.
- **This site**: Consciousness influences physical outcomes at quantum level. Genuine bidirectional interaction.

The choice depends on whether you find identity or causation more plausible as the mind-matter relation. IIT avoids the interaction problem (how do distinct substances influence each other?) but faces the hard problem in a new form (why is integrated information conscious?). This site faces the interaction problem but resolves it via quantum mechanics.

Neither theory is proven. Both represent serious attempts to take consciousness seriously. IIT deserves engagement as one of the most developed alternatives to interactionist dualism.

## Further Reading

- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The puzzle IIT addresses
- [[panpsychism]] — A related view on consciousness's ubiquity
- [[global-workspace-theory]] — IIT's main rival, also tested in COGITATE
- [[integrated-information-theory-2026-01-07]] — Detailed research notes
- [[tenets]] — This site's alternative framework

## References

- Tononi, G. (2004). An information integration theory of consciousness. *BMC Neuroscience*, 5, 42.
- Tononi, G. (2008). Consciousness as integrated information: a provisional manifesto. *Biological Bulletin*, 215(3), 216-242.
- Oizumi, M., Albantakis, L., & Tononi, G. (2014). From the phenomenology to the mechanisms of consciousness: Integrated information theory 3.0. *PLOS Computational Biology*, 10(5), e1003588.
- Albantakis, L., et al. (2023). Integrated information theory (IIT) 4.0. *PLOS Computational Biology*, 19(10), e1011465.
- Aaronson, S. (2014). Why I am not an integrated information theorist (or, the unconscious expander). *Shtetl-Optimized*.
- COGITATE Consortium. (2025). Adversarial testing of global neuronal workspace and integrated information theories of consciousness. *Nature*.
- Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Integrated Information Theory of Consciousness.
