obsidian/concepts/locality.md, before:

---
title: "Locality and Mind-Matter Interaction"
created: 2026-01-07
modified: 2026-01-07
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-07T21:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts:
  - "[[simulation]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
---

The locality problem asks: if consciousness influences quantum events in the brain, where exactly does this happen? This seems to require consciousness to have spatial properties, coordinating across potentially billions of sites. The objection appears strong—until we consider what the universe already accomplishes, what dualism actually implies about the "mind side," and what computational contexts reveal about interaction.

The concern rests on unstated assumptions about how non-physical causation must work. Examining these assumptions dissolves much of the apparent difficulty.

## The Objection Stated

From [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]:

> If consciousness influences quantum events in the brain, where exactly does this happen? The proposal requires:
> - Specific physical locations where selection occurs
> - Some mechanism for consciousness to "access" these locations
> - Coordination across potentially billions of such sites

The implicit argument: consciousness would need to be "present at" each quantum decision point, somehow knowing where to look and what to do. This seems to require spatial extension, which consciousness apparently lacks—or at least, which sits oddly with its apparent unity.

## Response 1: The Universe Already Does More Impressive Things

The universe routinely coordinates lawful behaviour across vast scales with perfect reliability. Every electron in existence obeys the same laws. Gravity reaches across billions of light-years instantaneously in the sense that the law itself applies everywhere. The strong force holds together every atomic nucleus with the same precise parameters.

If we ask "how does the electron know to behave like all other electrons?"—the question dissolves. It simply does. The law doesn't need a mechanism to "reach" each electron; the law *is* the pattern that electrons follow.

Consciousness coordinating quantum selections across billions of neural sites is less impressive than:
- 10^80 particles following identical physical laws
- Quantum entanglement correlating measurements across arbitrary distances
- The fine-tuning of constants across the entire observable universe

If universal physical law can coordinate behaviour across 10^26 metres with zero latency, why should coordinated influence across 10^-1 metres (a brain) be considered implausible?

## Response 2: The Mind Side Need Not Be Simple

The locality objection often assumes that the "mind" in dualism must be a simple, point-like thing—a soul that somehow lacks the resources to engage with complex spatial structure. But nothing in dualism requires this.

If physical reality has billions of interacting particles, immensely complex chemistry, and intricate spatial structure, why should the non-physical be simpler? The assumption that mind must be a featureless point reflects an impoverished imagination about what dualism permits.

Consider: if consciousness is not reducible to physics, it may have its own structure—perhaps *more* complex than physical structure, not less. The experienced richness of consciousness already hints at this. A single moment of visual experience contains more differentiated content than any physical description captures.

The mind side of dualism could include:
- Structure sufficient to engage with distributed physical events
- Intrinsic organisation that maps onto neural patterns
- Complexity that makes "coordinating billions of sites" trivial from its perspective

We should not import materialist assumptions about simplicity into our conception of what consciousness might be.

## Response 3: Simulation Makes Locality Trivial

The [[simulation|simulation hypothesis]] reveals that locality concerns are artefacts of assuming fundamental physics rather than implemented physics.

In any simulation:
- The "physical" world exists as data structures in a computational substrate
- Spatial relationships are represented, not fundamental
- Access to any "location" is equally available to the simulation layer
- Coordination across arbitrary spatial scales is trivial

If we exist in a simulation (or anything computationally analogous), then consciousness—whether part of the simulation substrate or interfacing with it—has no locality problem whatsoever. The "billions of sites" are just memory addresses, all equally accessible.

This doesn't require believing we *are* simulated. It reveals that the locality objection assumes a particular metaphysics (fundamental spacetime with consciousness somehow outside it trying to reach in). Alternative metaphysics dissolve the problem entirely.

## The Binding Problem Comparison

The binding problem asks how distributed neural activity produces unified experience. Critics sometimes argue that quantum selection makes this harder—now we need to unify distributed *selections* as well as distributed activity.

But the same point applies: the mind side of dualism can have whatever structure it needs. If consciousness is unified (as it phenomenologically appears), then it may engage with distributed physical events *as* a unified process. The puzzle of how distributed physics yields unified experience is the hard problem—it exists regardless of whether quantum selection occurs.

Quantum selection doesn't make binding harder; binding is already hard. The question is whether we have any reason to think quantum selection is *additionally* problematic. Given the responses above, we don't.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The site's [[tenets]] commit to bidirectional interaction: consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. The locality objection is one challenge to this commitment.

The responses here don't *prove* that consciousness coordinates quantum events across the brain. They show that:

1. **The objection proves too much.** If "coordinating across many locations" were intrinsically problematic, physical law itself would be mysterious—yet we accept it.

2. **The objection assumes too little.** Dualism permits rich structure in the non-physical. A complex mind engaging with complex matter is no more puzzling than complex matter engaging with complex matter.

3. **The objection is metaphysics-dependent.** Under simulation or computational hypotheses, locality simply isn't a constraint.

The bidirectional interaction tenet survives the locality challenge. It faces other challenges (decoherence, mechanism details), but spatial coordination is not an additional barrier.

## Further Reading

- [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]] — The broader question of whether quantum selection is coherent
- [[simulation]] — How computational framings dissolve locality concerns
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments these concepts serve

## References

- Chalmers, D. (2022). *Reality+: Virtual Worlds and the Problems of Philosophy*. W.W. Norton.
- Stapp, H. (2011). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
- Penrose, R. (1994). *Shadows of the Mind*. Oxford University Press.

Commit message:

feat(auto): deep-review - locality.md comprehensive update
- Added cross-links to newer content (interface-locality, brain-specialness, pairing-problem)
- Expanded concepts frontmatter
- Enhanced Response 2 with brain-specialness reference
- Added quantum entanglement observation to binding section
- Expanded Further Reading and References

Task: deep-review
Session: 234

obsidian/concepts/locality.md, after:

---
title: "Locality and Mind-Matter Interaction"
created: 2026-01-07
modified: 2026-01-19
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T13:45:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
last_deep_review: 2026-01-19T13:45:00+00:00
concepts:
  - "[[simulation]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interface-locality]]"
  - "[[brain-specialness]]"
  - "[[pairing-problem]]"
  - "[[binding-problem]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
---

The locality problem asks: if consciousness influences quantum events in the brain, where exactly does this happen? This seems to require consciousness to have spatial properties, coordinating across potentially billions of sites. The objection appears strong—until we consider what the universe already accomplishes, what [[interactionist-dualism|dualism]] actually implies about the "mind side," and what computational contexts reveal about interaction.

The concern rests on unstated assumptions about how non-physical causation must work. Examining these assumptions dissolves much of the apparent difficulty. For the more specific question of why consciousness acts on *this* brain rather than others, see [[interface-locality]]; for what makes brains suitable interfaces at all, see [[brain-specialness]].

## The Objection Stated

From [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]:

> If consciousness influences quantum events in the brain, where exactly does this happen? The proposal requires:
> - Specific physical locations where selection occurs
> - Some mechanism for consciousness to "access" these locations
> - Coordination across potentially billions of such sites

The implicit argument: consciousness would need to be "present at" each quantum decision point, somehow knowing where to look and what to do. This seems to require spatial extension, which consciousness apparently lacks—or at least, which sits oddly with its apparent unity.

## Response 1: The Universe Already Does More Impressive Things

The universe routinely coordinates lawful behaviour across vast scales with perfect reliability. Every electron in existence obeys the same laws. Gravity reaches across billions of light-years instantaneously in the sense that the law itself applies everywhere. The strong force holds together every atomic nucleus with the same precise parameters.

If we ask "how does the electron know to behave like all other electrons?"—the question dissolves. It simply does. The law doesn't need a mechanism to "reach" each electron; the law *is* the pattern that electrons follow.

Consciousness coordinating quantum selections across billions of neural sites is less impressive than:
- 10^80 particles following identical physical laws
- Quantum entanglement correlating measurements across arbitrary distances
- The fine-tuning of constants across the entire observable universe

If universal physical law can coordinate behaviour across 10^26 metres with zero latency, why should coordinated influence across 10^-1 metres (a brain) be considered implausible?

## Response 2: The Mind Side Need Not Be Simple

The locality objection often assumes that the "mind" in dualism must be a simple, point-like thing—a soul that somehow lacks the resources to engage with complex spatial structure. But nothing in dualism requires this. This assumption underlies the [[pairing-problem|pairing problem]]—the challenge of explaining what connects *this* mind to *this* body—yet it's an assumption, not a logical necessity.

If physical reality has billions of interacting particles, immensely complex chemistry, and intricate spatial structure, why should the non-physical be simpler? The assumption that mind must be a featureless point reflects an impoverished imagination about what dualism permits.

Consider: if consciousness is not reducible to physics, it may have its own structure—perhaps *more* complex than physical structure, not less. The experienced richness of consciousness already hints at this. A single moment of visual experience contains more differentiated content than any physical description captures.

The [[brain-specialness|brain specialness]] article develops this further: neural systems may be suitable interfaces precisely because they have the right kind of complexity—representational structure, feedback integration, quantum sensitivity—to engage with a complex mind. The mind-brain pairing isn't arbitrary; it reflects structural correspondence between the non-physical and physical domains.

The mind side of dualism could include:
- Structure sufficient to engage with distributed physical events
- Intrinsic organisation that maps onto neural patterns
- Complexity that makes "coordinating billions of sites" trivial from its perspective

We should not import materialist assumptions about simplicity into our conception of what consciousness might be.

## Response 3: Simulation Makes Locality Trivial

The [[simulation|simulation hypothesis]] reveals that locality concerns are artefacts of assuming fundamental physics rather than implemented physics.

In any simulation:
- The "physical" world exists as data structures in a computational substrate
- Spatial relationships are represented, not fundamental
- Access to any "location" is equally available to the simulation layer
- Coordination across arbitrary spatial scales is trivial

If we exist in a simulation (or anything computationally analogous), then consciousness—whether part of the simulation substrate or interfacing with it—has no locality problem whatsoever. The "billions of sites" are just memory addresses, all equally accessible.

This doesn't require believing we *are* simulated. It reveals that the locality objection assumes a particular metaphysics (fundamental spacetime with consciousness somehow outside it trying to reach in). Alternative metaphysics dissolve the problem entirely.

## The Binding Problem Comparison

The [[binding-problem|binding problem]] asks how distributed neural activity produces unified experience. Critics sometimes argue that [[quantum-consciousness|quantum selection]] makes this harder—now we need to unify distributed *selections* as well as distributed activity.

But the same point applies: the mind side of dualism can have whatever structure it needs. If consciousness is unified (as it phenomenologically appears), then it may engage with distributed physical events *as* a unified process. The puzzle of how distributed physics yields unified experience is the hard problem—it exists regardless of whether quantum selection occurs.

Indeed, quantum entanglement may *help* with binding rather than hinder it. If neural quantum events are entangled, they constitute a single holistic state rather than billions of independent decisions. The quantum framework doesn't merely tolerate coordination—it provides a natural mechanism for it.

Quantum selection doesn't make binding harder; binding is already hard. The question is whether we have any reason to think quantum selection is *additionally* problematic. Given the responses above, we don't.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The site's [[tenets]] commit to bidirectional interaction: consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. The locality objection is one challenge to this commitment.

The responses here don't *prove* that consciousness coordinates quantum events across the brain. They show that:

1. **The objection proves too much.** If "coordinating across many locations" were intrinsically problematic, physical law itself would be mysterious—yet we accept it.

2. **The objection assumes too little.** Dualism permits rich structure in the non-physical. A complex mind engaging with complex matter is no more puzzling than complex matter engaging with complex matter.

3. **The objection is metaphysics-dependent.** Under simulation or computational hypotheses, locality simply isn't a constraint.

The bidirectional interaction tenet survives the locality challenge. It faces other challenges ([[decoherence]], mechanism details), but spatial coordination is not an additional barrier.

## Further Reading

- [[interface-locality]] — Why consciousness acts on *this* brain specifically
- [[brain-specialness]] — What makes neural systems suitable interfaces
- [[pairing-problem]] — Kim's challenge about mind-body connection
- [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]] — The broader question of whether quantum selection is coherent
- [[simulation]] — How computational framings dissolve locality concerns
- [[binding-problem]] — How distributed activity yields unified experience
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments these concepts serve

## References

- Chalmers, D. (2022). *Reality+: Virtual Worlds and the Problems of Philosophy*. W.W. Norton.
- Kim, J. (2005). *Physicalism, or Something Near Enough*. Princeton University Press. [Develops the pairing problem objection to substance dualism]
- Penrose, R. (1994). *Shadows of the Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Stapp, H. (2011). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
