obsidian/concepts/materialism.md, before:

---
title: "Materialism"
description: "Why physicalism fails to explain consciousness. The explanatory gap, knowledge argument, and zombie conceivability reveal irreducible phenomenal properties."
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-20
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-27T12:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[dualism]]"
  - "[[reductionism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[arguments-for-dualism]]"
  - "[[arguments-against-materialism]]"
  - "[[analytic-idealism]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[combination-problem]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
  - "[[argument-from-reason]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-20T18:30:00+00:00
---

Materialism (or physicalism) holds that everything that exists is physical—including consciousness. On this view, your experience of seeing red is not something *in addition to* brain activity; it *is* brain activity, or emerges from it, or will one day be explained entirely in physical terms. Materialism has dominated academic philosophy of mind for decades, promising ontological simplicity and alignment with natural science.

The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets]] reject materialism. The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet holds that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes. Understanding materialism's appeal—and its failure when applied to consciousness—clarifies what the Map affirms and why.

## Varieties of Materialism

Materialism is not a single view but a family of positions, unified by denying that consciousness requires anything beyond the physical.

### Reductive Materialism

The most straightforward version: mental states *are* brain states. Pain *is* C-fiber activation. Seeing red *is* certain patterns of neural firing. Just as water turned out to *be* H2O, consciousness turns out to be neural processes.

The appeal is explanatory closure. Once we identify the relevant brain states, there's nothing left to explain. The mind-body problem dissolves.

The problem: unlike water=H2O, consciousness=brain states doesn't satisfy. We understand *why* water has its properties given H2O's properties. We don't understand why C-fiber activation feels like anything. The [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]] persists. Reduction is asserted, not explained.

### Non-Reductive Materialism

A more modest position: mental states *supervene on* physical states (no mental difference without physical difference) but aren't reducible to them. Consciousness is not identical to brain activity but is fully determined by it.

This position tries to honor consciousness's distinctiveness while staying materialist. Mental properties are "multiply realizable"—the same mental state could be realized by different physical substrates (silicon, carbon, etc.).

The problem: this doesn't solve the hard problem. Even if consciousness supervenes on the physical, *why* does it? The supervenience relation itself is unexplained. Calling consciousness "non-reducible but physical" doesn't show how physical processes give rise to experience—it just asserts they do.

### Eliminative Materialism

The radical option: consciousness as we conceive it doesn't exist. Our folk-psychological concepts—beliefs, desires, experiences—are like "phlogiston" or "caloric"—theoretical posits that a mature neuroscience will eliminate, not reduce. There's nothing for neuroscience to explain because there's nothing there.

The appeal: no hard problem if there's no consciousness to explain. The problem vanishes because its subject matter vanishes.

The problem: eliminativism seems to deny the obvious. Something it's like to read these words. Eliminativists are not zombies making noises about a non-existent phenomenon; they're conscious beings denying their own experience. The position is self-undermining in a way similar to [[epiphenomenalism]].

### Illusionism

[[illusionism|Illusionism]] holds that consciousness exists but not as we conceive it. Dennett and Frankish argue we have a systematic illusion of rich [[qualia|qualitative experience]]—what exists is just information processing that represents itself as having qualitative properties.

The problem: illusionism trades the hard problem for the "illusion problem"—explaining why we so powerfully believe we're phenomenally conscious when we're not. All illusions presuppose experience; being under an illusion about qualia still involves *something it is like* to have that illusion. The problem reappears at each level of analysis.

See [[illusionism]] for detailed treatment.

## The Causal Closure Argument

Materialism's strongest support comes from the apparent causal closure of physics:

1. Every physical event that has a cause has a sufficient physical cause.
2. Mental events cause physical events (we act on our decisions).
3. Mental events are not over and above physical events (or there'd be overdetermination).
4. Therefore, mental events are physical events.

This argument underwrites the materialist consensus. If physics is complete—if you don't need to invoke non-physical causes to explain physical effects—then consciousness must be physical or causally irrelevant.

The Map's response targets premise 1. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet holds that physics is *not* complete at quantum indeterminacies. Consciousness can influence outcomes that physics leaves undetermined without violating physical law. Causal closure is true for determined events but false for indeterminate ones.

## Why Materialism Fails

Several lines of argument suggest materialism cannot accommodate consciousness. These are not merely objections to materialism; they constitute [[arguments-for-dualism|positive arguments for dualism]] that converge on the same conclusion from independent directions. [[Dualism]]—the view that consciousness is ontologically distinct from matter—gains support precisely where materialism fails. The 2020 PhilPapers survey found 22% of philosophers accept or lean toward dualism—the second most popular position after materialism itself.

For a comprehensive treatment of these arguments, including Kripke's modal argument, Nagel's subjectivity argument, and the convergence argument showing how independent lines of reasoning reinforce each other, see [[arguments-against-materialism]].

### The Explanatory Gap

Physical descriptions of brain states never explain *why* those states feel like anything. We can correlate C-fiber firing with pain reports, but the connection remains opaque. No amount of neural detail closes the gap. This suggests the physical story, however complete, leaves something out. See [[explanatory-gap]] for detailed discussion.

### The Knowledge Argument

[[knowledge-argument|Mary's Room]]: Mary, a color scientist in a black-and-white room, knows every physical fact about color vision. Yet when she first sees red, she learns something new—what it's *like* to see red. If physical facts were all facts, she couldn't learn anything. But she does. So there are facts beyond physical facts.

Physicalist responses (ability hypothesis, phenomenal concepts strategy) face decisive objections. Jackson himself later rejected the argument due to epiphenomenalism worries—but this actually supports the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet: if consciousness were causally inert, Mary couldn't form beliefs about her new experiences. See [[knowledge-argument]] for detailed treatment.

### The Conceivability Arguments

We can conceive of [[philosophical-zombies]]—beings physically identical to us but without consciousness. If such beings are genuinely conceivable, they're metaphysically possible. And if possible, consciousness is not entailed by physical facts—materialism is false.

Physicalists dispute conceivability or the conceivability-possibility link, but neither response has proven convincing. The burden is on materialists to show why physical duplicates must have identical experiences—and they haven't. See [[philosophical-zombies]] for detailed treatment.

### The Self-Stultification Problem

The [[argument-from-reason]]: if physicalism is true, it cannot be *rationally believed*. Rational inference requires tracking normative relationships—recognizing that conclusions *follow from* premises. But physical causation operates via efficient causes that make no reference to these norms.

If your belief in physicalism is fully explained by nonrational causes (electrochemical processes), it wasn't formed *because* the evidence supports it. The belief might be true, but it wouldn't be rationally justified. The reliabilist response—that evolution made brains truth-tracking—presupposes normative concepts and faces Plantinga's objection that evolution selects for adaptive behavior, not true beliefs.

See [[argument-from-reason]] for the full development.

### The Problem of Phenomenal Properties

[[qualia|Qualia]]—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain—have properties that physical descriptions cannot capture. They are:

- **Intrinsic**: redness is a quality in itself, not just a functional role
- **Private**: only I have direct access to my qualia
- **Ineffable**: no physical description fully captures what redness is like

Physical descriptions are structural and relational. Qualia are neither. Materialism must either deny qualia exist (eliminativism), deny they have these properties (functionalism), or leave them unexplained (the gap).

## The Materialist Response

Materialists are not defenseless. Common responses:

### "Future Science"

We don't understand consciousness now, but science advances. Consciousness will yield to physical explanation as other mysteries have.

Problem: past scientific progress explained phenomena by showing *how* they followed from underlying mechanisms. With consciousness, we can't even see what form such explanation would take. It's not that we're missing facts; we can't imagine what facts would close the gap.

### "Mysterialism for Everyone"

Dualism doesn't explain consciousness either—it just posits a soul or mental substance and leaves the hard problem equally unsolved. If materialism is stuck with mystery, so is everyone else.

Problem: the Map doesn't claim to *explain* consciousness. The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet holds that consciousness is fundamental, not derived from anything else. Materialism claims consciousness derives from the physical—and must explain how. Dualism makes no such claim.

### "Phenomenal Concepts"

The explanatory gap reflects how we conceptualize experience, not what experience is. We have special phenomenal concepts that don't connect transparently to physical concepts. The gap is in our thinking, not in reality.

Problem: why would we have concepts that so systematically misrepresent a physical phenomenon? If consciousness is physical, why don't we recognize it as such? The conceptual gap points to an ontological gap.

### The Mysterian Alternative

[[mysterianism|Mysterianism]] (Colin McGinn) argues that consciousness may have a naturalistic explanation—but one human minds are cognitively closed to understanding. The solution may exist; we simply cannot reach it.

This undercuts the "future science" appeal: if McGinn is right, no amount of progress will close the gap. The Map's position differs—rather than treating the hard problem as unsolvable mystery, we take it as evidence that the materialist framework is wrong. See [[mysterianism]] for detailed treatment.

### Alternative Frameworks

Process philosophy (Whitehead), [[panpsychism]], and [[analytic-idealism]] each challenge the materialism/dualism binary in different ways. These frameworks illustrate that rejecting materialism doesn't force Cartesian substance dualism—other options exist. The Map takes no position on these alternatives; what matters is the core claim: consciousness is not reducible to or derivable from the physical as materialism conceives it.

## Relation to the Map's Perspective

Materialism is the Map's primary opponent. Understanding its failure motivates the [[tenets|tenet framework]]:

**[[Dualism]]** is accepted because materialism fails. Physical descriptions leave the [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]]; physical facts don't entail experiential facts; [[qualia]] resist physical characterization. Consciousness must be something beyond the physical. See [[dualism]] for the positive case.

**Bidirectional Interaction** is needed because rejecting materialism could lead to [[epiphenomenalism]]—accepting consciousness is non-physical but denying it does anything. The Map rejects this move: consciousness causally influences physical outcomes, or we couldn't even discuss it.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction** responds to the causal closure argument. If physics were complete, there'd be no room for mental causation. But physics is not complete at quantum indeterminacies. Consciousness acts there, biasing otherwise undetermined outcomes.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits** explains why materialism's apparent simplicity is misleading. Materialism seems simpler because it ignores what it cannot explain. True simplicity is not achieved by denying recalcitrant phenomena.

**No Many Worlds** matters here because the [[many-worlds|many-worlds interpretation]] of quantum mechanics is often presented as supporting materialism by eliminating the need for consciousness at collapse. If all outcomes occur in branching universes, no selection is needed—and thus no role for consciousness. But this "solution" merely relocates the hard problem: why am I experiencing *this* branch and not another? The indexical question about which branch I find myself in is as mysterious as the original question about why there is experience at all. Materialism gains nothing by trading the hard problem for the indexical problem.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The Map's rejection of materialism is not unfalsifiable. Evidence for materialism could include: (1) a successful reduction that genuinely explained *why* neural configurations produce specific qualia—predicting novel experiences from physical descriptions; (2) verified consciousness uploading showing substrate-independence; (3) solving the [[combination-problem|combination problem]] with the same explanatory transparency as chemistry; (4) neuroscientific elimination of qualia as distinct from information-processing; or (5) identifying the specific cognitive error behind our conviction of phenomenal experience.

None currently obtains, and each faces significant challenges. Materialism remains the academic consensus, but the Map holds this consensus is maintained by treating the hard problem as merely difficult rather than unsolvable in materialist terms.

## Further Reading

- [[argument-from-reason]] — The self-stultification argument: physicalism undermines rational justification for any belief, including itself
- [[arguments-against-materialism]] — Seven converging arguments against physicalism with the convergence argument
- [[dualism]] — What dualism claims and its main varieties (foundational overview)
- [[arguments-for-dualism]] — The positive case for dualism (conceivability, knowledge, qualia, unity, intentionality, modal arguments)
- [[knowledge-argument]] — The knowledge argument (Mary's Room) in detail
- [[explanatory-gap]] — What physical explanations leave out
- [[philosophical-zombies]] — The zombie argument against materialism in detail
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The problem materialism cannot solve
- [[analytic-idealism]] — Idealism's challenge to both materialism and dualism
- [[epiphenomenalism]] — What happens if you accept the gap but deny mental causation
- [[illusionism]] — Materialism's most radical response to the hard problem
- [[functionalism]] — A materialist theory the Map rejects
- [[mysterianism]] — The cognitive closure hypothesis and its implications
- [[introspection]] — The reliability debate about first-person access
- [[panpsychism]] — An alternative that avoids the emergence problem
- [[many-worlds]] — Why MWI doesn't rescue materialism from the hard problem
- [[tenets]] — the Map's alternative framework

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Churchland, P. M. (1981). "Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes." *Journal of Philosophy*, 78(2), 67-90.
- Dennett, D. C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
- Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 23(11-12), 11-39.
- Jackson, F. (1982). "Epiphenomenal Qualia." *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- Kim, J. (1989). "The Myth of Nonreductive Materialism." *Proceedings of the APA*, 63, 31-47.
- Levine, J. (1983). "Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap." *Pacific Philosophical Quarterly*, 64, 354-361.
- McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98(391), 349-366.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *Philosophical Review*, 83, 435-450.
- Tallis, R. (2011). *Aping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis, and the Misrepresentation of Humanity*. Acumen.
- Whitehead, A. N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): expand concepts/materialism.md eliminativism response and add phenomenology link
- Strengthened eliminativism critique: acknowledged Churchland's functional-states response rather than simple dismissal
- Noted that this response shifts the problem (what explains qualitative illusion?) rather than resolving it
- Added phenomenology to frontmatter concepts and linked inline "something it is like" language
- Word count: 2197 → 2225 (+28 words)

obsidian/concepts/materialism.md, after:

---
title: "Materialism"
description: "Why physicalism fails to explain consciousness. The explanatory gap, knowledge argument, and zombie conceivability reveal irreducible phenomenal properties."
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-20
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-01T09:13:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[dualism]]"
  - "[[reductionism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[arguments-for-dualism]]"
  - "[[arguments-against-materialism]]"
  - "[[analytic-idealism]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[combination-problem]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
  - "[[argument-from-reason]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-02-01T09:13:00+00:00
---

Materialism (or physicalism) holds that everything that exists is physical—including consciousness. On this view, your experience of seeing red is not something *in addition to* brain activity; it *is* brain activity, or emerges from it, or will one day be explained entirely in physical terms. Materialism has dominated academic philosophy of mind for decades, promising ontological simplicity and alignment with natural science.

The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets]] reject materialism. The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet holds that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes. Understanding materialism's appeal—and its failure when applied to consciousness—clarifies what the Map affirms and why.

## Varieties of Materialism

Materialism is not a single view but a family of positions, unified by denying that consciousness requires anything beyond the physical.

### Reductive Materialism

The most straightforward version: mental states *are* brain states. Pain *is* C-fiber activation. Seeing red *is* certain patterns of neural firing. Just as water turned out to *be* H2O, consciousness turns out to be neural processes.

The appeal is explanatory closure. Once we identify the relevant brain states, there's nothing left to explain. The mind-body problem dissolves.

The problem: unlike water=H2O, consciousness=brain states doesn't satisfy. We understand *why* water has its properties given H2O's properties. We don't understand why C-fiber activation feels like anything. The [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]] persists. Reduction is asserted, not explained.

### Non-Reductive Materialism

A more modest position: mental states *supervene on* physical states (no mental difference without physical difference) but aren't reducible to them. Consciousness is not identical to brain activity but is fully determined by it.

This position tries to honor consciousness's distinctiveness while staying materialist. Mental properties are "multiply realizable"—the same mental state could be realized by different physical substrates (silicon, carbon, etc.).

The problem: this doesn't solve the hard problem. Even if consciousness supervenes on the physical, *why* does it? The supervenience relation itself is unexplained. Calling consciousness "non-reducible but physical" doesn't show how physical processes give rise to experience—it just asserts they do.

### Eliminative Materialism

The radical option: consciousness as we conceive it doesn't exist. Our folk-psychological concepts—beliefs, desires, experiences—are like "phlogiston" or "caloric"—theoretical posits that a mature neuroscience will eliminate, not reduce. There's nothing for neuroscience to explain because there's nothing there.

The appeal: no hard problem if there's no consciousness to explain. The problem vanishes because its subject matter vanishes.

The problem: eliminativism seems to deny the obvious. There is [[phenomenology|something it is like]] to read these words. Eliminativists respond that functional states can be acknowledged without the folk psychological framework of "experiences" and "qualia"—but this response merely pushes back the question: what explains the differential processing that constitutes the illusion of rich qualitative character? The position risks self-undermining in a way similar to [[epiphenomenalism]].

### Illusionism

[[illusionism|Illusionism]] holds that consciousness exists but not as we conceive it. Dennett and Frankish argue we have a systematic illusion of rich [[qualia|qualitative experience]]—what exists is just information processing that represents itself as having qualitative properties.

The problem: illusionism trades the hard problem for the "illusion problem"—explaining why we so powerfully believe we're phenomenally conscious when we're not. All illusions presuppose experience; being under an illusion about qualia still involves *something it is like* to have that illusion. The problem reappears at each level of analysis.

See [[illusionism]] for detailed treatment.

## The Causal Closure Argument

Materialism's strongest support comes from the apparent causal closure of physics:

1. Every physical event that has a cause has a sufficient physical cause.
2. Mental events cause physical events (we act on our decisions).
3. Mental events are not over and above physical events (or there'd be overdetermination).
4. Therefore, mental events are physical events.

This argument underwrites the materialist consensus. If physics is complete—if you don't need to invoke non-physical causes to explain physical effects—then consciousness must be physical or causally irrelevant.

The Map's response targets premise 1. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet holds that physics is *not* complete at quantum indeterminacies. Consciousness can influence outcomes that physics leaves undetermined without violating physical law. Causal closure is true for determined events but false for indeterminate ones.

## Why Materialism Fails

Several lines of argument suggest materialism cannot accommodate consciousness. These are not merely objections to materialism; they constitute [[arguments-for-dualism|positive arguments for dualism]] that converge on the same conclusion from independent directions. [[Dualism]]—the view that consciousness is ontologically distinct from matter—gains support precisely where materialism fails. The 2020 PhilPapers survey found 22% of philosophers accept or lean toward dualism—the second most popular position after materialism itself.

For a comprehensive treatment of these arguments, including Kripke's modal argument, Nagel's subjectivity argument, and the convergence argument showing how independent lines of reasoning reinforce each other, see [[arguments-against-materialism]].

### The Explanatory Gap

Physical descriptions of brain states never explain *why* those states feel like anything. We can correlate C-fiber firing with pain reports, but the connection remains opaque. No amount of neural detail closes the gap. This suggests the physical story, however complete, leaves something out. See [[explanatory-gap]] for detailed discussion.

### The Knowledge Argument

[[knowledge-argument|Mary's Room]]: Mary, a color scientist in a black-and-white room, knows every physical fact about color vision. Yet when she first sees red, she learns something new—what it's *like* to see red. If physical facts were all facts, she couldn't learn anything. But she does. So there are facts beyond physical facts.

Physicalist responses (ability hypothesis, phenomenal concepts strategy) face decisive objections. Jackson himself later rejected the argument due to epiphenomenalism worries—but this actually supports the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet: if consciousness were causally inert, Mary couldn't form beliefs about her new experiences. See [[knowledge-argument]] for detailed treatment.

### The Conceivability Arguments

We can conceive of [[philosophical-zombies]]—beings physically identical to us but without consciousness. If such beings are genuinely conceivable, they're metaphysically possible. And if possible, consciousness is not entailed by physical facts—materialism is false.

Physicalists dispute conceivability or the conceivability-possibility link, but neither response has proven convincing. The burden is on materialists to show why physical duplicates must have identical experiences—and they haven't. See [[philosophical-zombies]] for detailed treatment.

### The Self-Stultification Problem

The [[argument-from-reason]]: if physicalism is true, it cannot be *rationally believed*. Rational inference requires tracking normative relationships—recognizing that conclusions *follow from* premises. But physical causation operates via efficient causes that make no reference to these norms.

If your belief in physicalism is fully explained by nonrational causes (electrochemical processes), it wasn't formed *because* the evidence supports it. The belief might be true, but it wouldn't be rationally justified. The reliabilist response—that evolution made brains truth-tracking—presupposes normative concepts and faces Plantinga's objection that evolution selects for adaptive behavior, not true beliefs.

See [[argument-from-reason]] for the full development.

### The Problem of Phenomenal Properties

[[qualia|Qualia]]—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain—have properties that physical descriptions cannot capture. They are:

- **Intrinsic**: redness is a quality in itself, not just a functional role
- **Private**: only I have direct access to my qualia
- **Ineffable**: no physical description fully captures what redness is like

Physical descriptions are structural and relational. Qualia are neither. Materialism must either deny qualia exist (eliminativism), deny they have these properties (functionalism), or leave them unexplained (the gap).

## The Materialist Response

Materialists are not defenseless. Common responses:

### "Future Science"

We don't understand consciousness now, but science advances. Consciousness will yield to physical explanation as other mysteries have.

Problem: past scientific progress explained phenomena by showing *how* they followed from underlying mechanisms. With consciousness, we can't even see what form such explanation would take. It's not that we're missing facts; we can't imagine what facts would close the gap.

### "Mysterialism for Everyone"

Dualism doesn't explain consciousness either—it just posits a soul or mental substance and leaves the hard problem equally unsolved. If materialism is stuck with mystery, so is everyone else.

Problem: the Map doesn't claim to *explain* consciousness. The [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet holds that consciousness is fundamental, not derived from anything else. Materialism claims consciousness derives from the physical—and must explain how. Dualism makes no such claim.

### "Phenomenal Concepts"

The explanatory gap reflects how we conceptualize experience, not what experience is. We have special phenomenal concepts that don't connect transparently to physical concepts. The gap is in our thinking, not in reality.

Problem: why would we have concepts that so systematically misrepresent a physical phenomenon? If consciousness is physical, why don't we recognize it as such? The conceptual gap points to an ontological gap.

### The Mysterian Alternative

[[mysterianism|Mysterianism]] (Colin McGinn) argues that consciousness may have a naturalistic explanation—but one human minds are cognitively closed to understanding. The solution may exist; we simply cannot reach it.

This undercuts the "future science" appeal: if McGinn is right, no amount of progress will close the gap. The Map's position differs—rather than treating the hard problem as unsolvable mystery, we take it as evidence that the materialist framework is wrong. See [[mysterianism]] for detailed treatment.

### Alternative Frameworks

Process philosophy (Whitehead), [[panpsychism]], and [[analytic-idealism]] each challenge the materialism/dualism binary in different ways. These frameworks illustrate that rejecting materialism doesn't force Cartesian substance dualism—other options exist. The Map takes no position on these alternatives; what matters is the core claim: consciousness is not reducible to or derivable from the physical as materialism conceives it.

## Relation to the Map's Perspective

Materialism is the Map's primary opponent. Understanding its failure motivates the [[tenets|tenet framework]]:

**[[Dualism]]** is accepted because materialism fails. Physical descriptions leave the [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]]; physical facts don't entail experiential facts; [[qualia]] resist physical characterization. Consciousness must be something beyond the physical. See [[dualism]] for the positive case.

**Bidirectional Interaction** is needed because rejecting materialism could lead to [[epiphenomenalism]]—accepting consciousness is non-physical but denying it does anything. The Map rejects this move: consciousness causally influences physical outcomes, or we couldn't even discuss it.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction** responds to the causal closure argument. If physics were complete, there'd be no room for mental causation. But physics is not complete at quantum indeterminacies. Consciousness acts there, biasing otherwise undetermined outcomes.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits** explains why materialism's apparent simplicity is misleading. Materialism seems simpler because it ignores what it cannot explain. True simplicity is not achieved by denying recalcitrant phenomena.

**No Many Worlds** matters here because the [[many-worlds|many-worlds interpretation]] of quantum mechanics is often presented as supporting materialism by eliminating the need for consciousness at collapse. If all outcomes occur in branching universes, no selection is needed—and thus no role for consciousness. But this "solution" merely relocates the hard problem: why am I experiencing *this* branch and not another? The indexical question about which branch I find myself in is as mysterious as the original question about why there is experience at all. Materialism gains nothing by trading the hard problem for the indexical problem.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The Map's rejection of materialism is not unfalsifiable. Evidence for materialism could include: (1) a successful reduction that genuinely explained *why* neural configurations produce specific qualia—predicting novel experiences from physical descriptions; (2) verified consciousness uploading showing substrate-independence; (3) solving the [[combination-problem|combination problem]] with the same explanatory transparency as chemistry; (4) neuroscientific elimination of qualia as distinct from information-processing; or (5) identifying the specific cognitive error behind our conviction of phenomenal experience.

None currently obtains, and each faces significant challenges. Materialism remains the academic consensus, but the Map holds this consensus is maintained by treating the hard problem as merely difficult rather than unsolvable in materialist terms.

## Further Reading

- [[argument-from-reason]] — The self-stultification argument: physicalism undermines rational justification for any belief, including itself
- [[arguments-against-materialism]] — Seven converging arguments against physicalism with the convergence argument
- [[dualism]] — What dualism claims and its main varieties (foundational overview)
- [[arguments-for-dualism]] — The positive case for dualism (conceivability, knowledge, qualia, unity, intentionality, modal arguments)
- [[knowledge-argument]] — The knowledge argument (Mary's Room) in detail
- [[explanatory-gap]] — What physical explanations leave out
- [[philosophical-zombies]] — The zombie argument against materialism in detail
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The problem materialism cannot solve
- [[analytic-idealism]] — Idealism's challenge to both materialism and dualism
- [[epiphenomenalism]] — What happens if you accept the gap but deny mental causation
- [[illusionism]] — Materialism's most radical response to the hard problem
- [[functionalism]] — A materialist theory the Map rejects
- [[mysterianism]] — The cognitive closure hypothesis and its implications
- [[introspection]] — The reliability debate about first-person access
- [[panpsychism]] — An alternative that avoids the emergence problem
- [[many-worlds]] — Why MWI doesn't rescue materialism from the hard problem
- [[tenets]] — the Map's alternative framework

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Churchland, P. M. (1981). "Eliminative Materialism and the Propositional Attitudes." *Journal of Philosophy*, 78(2), 67-90.
- Dennett, D. C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
- Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 23(11-12), 11-39.
- Jackson, F. (1982). "Epiphenomenal Qualia." *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- Kim, J. (1989). "The Myth of Nonreductive Materialism." *Proceedings of the APA*, 63, 31-47.
- Levine, J. (1983). "Materialism and Qualia: The Explanatory Gap." *Pacific Philosophical Quarterly*, 64, 354-361.
- McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98(391), 349-366.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *Philosophical Review*, 83, 435-450.
- Tallis, R. (2011). *Aping Mankind: Neuromania, Darwinitis, and the Misrepresentation of Humanity*. Acumen.
- Whitehead, A. N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.
