obsidian/concepts/moral-responsibility.md, before:

---
title: "Moral Responsibility"
created: 2026-01-16
modified: 2026-01-16
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-16T13:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[ethics-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Moral responsibility requires that agents deserve praise or blame for their actions. If an agent couldn't have done otherwise, or wasn't the genuine source of their choice, holding them responsible seems unjust. The site's [[agent-causation|agent-causal]] framework grounds moral responsibility differently than compatibilism does: agents are genuine sources of action through [[quantum-consciousness|quantum selection]], making desert metaphysically robust rather than merely pragmatic.

This has practical implications. If agents truly author their choices—not as links in deterministic chains but as initiators of causal sequences—then blame and praise track something real about the agent. Moral responsibility isn't a useful fiction but a response to genuine facts about who caused what.

## The Traditional Problem

Moral responsibility seems to require:

1. **Control**: The agent could have done otherwise
2. **Sourcehood**: The agent, not prior causes, originated the action
3. **Knowledge**: The agent knew (or should have known) what they were doing

Determinism threatens both control and sourcehood. If every event follows necessarily from prior causes, no one could have done otherwise, and no one originates anything—everyone is a link in causal chains stretching back to the Big Bang.

### Compatibilist Response

Compatibilists argue that moral responsibility is compatible with determinism because "could have done otherwise" means "would have done otherwise, if different desires." The relevant control is acting from one's own desires without external coercion. Harry Frankfurt's hierarchical view adds sophistication: you're responsible for actions that flow from desires you reflectively endorse—"second-order" desires about what you want to want.

This captures something real. The psychopath who acts on antisocial desires differs morally from the person coerced at gunpoint. Compatibilism distinguishes them.

But critics argue it doesn't ground *desert*. If your desires were determined by factors you didn't choose—genes, upbringing, neural chemistry—how do you *deserve* blame for acting on them? You couldn't have had different desires. Compatibilism may justify intervention (restraining dangerous people) but not retribution (punishing because they deserve it).

### Libertarian Response

Libertarians argue genuine moral responsibility requires indeterminism—that agents could *really* have done otherwise, not just counterfactually. But mere indeterminism doesn't help: random choices aren't free choices. If my action was undetermined but I didn't determine it, what makes it *mine* rather than a lucky accident?

This is where [[agent-causation|agent causation]] enters. The agent, as a persisting substance, directly causes the action. The causation doesn't reduce to prior events. When I choose to help a friend, *I* caused the helping—not prior mental events that caused decision events that caused movement events. The regress of causes stops at the agent.

## Agent Causation and Desert

Agent causation grounds moral responsibility in a distinctive way:

### Genuine Sourcehood

The agent is the ultimate source of the action. Prior factors (genes, environment, neural states) influenced but didn't determine. The agent determined by exercising irreducible causal power. This satisfies Robert Kane's sourcehood requirement: free agents must be "ultimate creators (or originators) and sustainers" of their choices.

If sourcehood is satisfied, desert becomes intelligible. You deserve blame for the bad action because *you* caused it—not the Big Bang, not your parents, not your neural chemistry. Those influenced you, but the causal buck stops with you.

### Contrastive Explanation

Why did the agent choose A rather than B? The agent-causal answer: because the agent exercised causal power in favor of A. This isn't a non-answer—it's the answer. The agent's choosing is the explanation. Those seeking a deeper explanation (what about the agent made them choose A?) are presupposing event-causal reduction that agent causation rejects.

This matters for responsibility. If we can't explain why the agent chose A rather than B in terms of prior causes, some worry the choice was arbitrary. But agent causalists respond: the agent's reasons guided the choice. The agent chose A because A served their values, responded to considerations that mattered. The reasons didn't *determine* the outcome—alternatives remained possible—but they *guided* it.

### The Luck Objection, Again

The luck objection to libertarian free will applies to moral responsibility. If nothing about the agent explains why they chose to help rather than harm, how do they deserve praise or blame? The difference seems like luck.

The site's [[free-will#Why the Site's Framework Escapes Luck|response]] addresses this directly. Consciousness-selected indeterminism differs from lucky indeterminism:

| Feature | Lucky Indeterminism | Consciousness-Selected |
|---------|---------------------|------------------------|
| What determines outcome | Nothing (chance) | The agent, for reasons |
| Contrastive explanation | Unavailable | Agent's reasons |
| Basis for desert | Unclear | Agent's genuine authorship |

If selection is reasons-guided, desert is grounded. You deserve blame for the cruel choice because *you* selected cruelty when kindness was available, and you selected it for reasons (malice, indifference) that reflect badly on you.

## How Desert Differs Under Agent Causation

Compatibilist desert is pragmatic: holding people responsible has good consequences (deterrence, reform, social coordination). Whether anyone *really* deserves anything in a deeper sense is set aside.

Agent-causal desert is metaphysical: people really deserve praise and blame because they really originated their actions. This has several implications:

### Retribution Becomes Intelligible

Retributive punishment—punishment because the wrongdoer deserves it, not just for deterrence or reform—requires that the wrongdoer merits suffering for what they did. Under compatibilism, it's hard to see why anyone merits suffering for actions that couldn't have been otherwise.

Under agent causation, retribution is intelligible. The wrongdoer exercised their power to cause harm when they could have caused good. They deserve consequences proportional to what they did and who they are. This doesn't prove retribution is *right*—one might reject it on other grounds—but it makes it coherent.

### Mitigation Has Limits

Compatibilism tends toward excusing conditions: the more we understand the causes of behavior, the less responsible agents seem. If neural abnormality caused the violence, if childhood trauma caused the cruelty, if addiction caused the theft—where does responsibility remain?

Agent causation limits this trend. Prior causes influenced but didn't determine. The agent still selected. Understanding etiology helps assess what the agent could control, but doesn't eliminate responsibility entirely. The addict who steals chose to steal, even if addiction made resisting harder. Difficulty doesn't equal impossibility. If the agent could have resisted—if some addicts do resist—the choice not to resist was still theirs.

This doesn't eliminate all mitigation. Agents who couldn't understand their actions (young children, psychotic individuals) may lack the knowledge requirement. Agents under extreme duress have responsibility diminished. But the general trend—toward explaining away responsibility via causal history—is resisted.

### Character Responsibility

We hold people responsible not just for individual acts but for who they are. The generous person is praiseworthy; the malicious person is blameworthy. But if character is produced by unchosen factors, how is this fair?

Agent causation provides an answer: character is partly self-created. Each choice reinforces or modifies dispositions. The compassionate person became compassionate through repeated compassionate choices—choices they made, not choices that were made in them. Over time, the agent shapes who they become.

This doesn't mean we're responsible for our initial characters (shaped before we could choose). But we are responsible for what we make of them. The agent who recognizes their vicious dispositions and works to change them deserves praise; the agent who cultivates vicious dispositions deserves blame.

## The Role of Consciousness

Moral responsibility on this framework requires consciousness. The agent that sources action is a conscious being with [[mental-causation|mental causation]]. Several features matter:

### Experience of Alternatives

Conscious choice involves experiencing alternatives as live options. When you deliberate, multiple possibilities present themselves—you could help or ignore, tell the truth or lie. This phenomenology of open alternatives grounds the intuition that you could have done otherwise. Under agent causation, the phenomenology tracks reality: the alternatives were genuinely possible.

### Phenomenology of Effort

The [[mental-effort|phenomenology of effort]] supports responsibility. Choosing feels effortful—maintaining focus, resisting temptation, following through. If choices were merely determined by prior causes, effort phenomenology would be epiphenomenal decoration. But if agents genuinely cause their choices, effort reflects real engagement. The felt difficulty of doing right corresponds to genuine exercise of causal power against countervailing forces.

### Self-Knowledge

Responsible agents know what they're doing. Consciousness provides this: you experience your intentions, anticipate consequences, recognize the meaning of your actions. This knowledge grounds the epistemic requirement for responsibility. Unconscious processes don't bear responsibility because nothing in them knows or chooses.

## Relation to Site Tenets

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: If consciousness is irreducible to physical processes, conscious agents aren't merely complex physical systems. They're substances capable of genuine causal origination. This grounds the metaphysics of agent causation.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Consciousness causally influences the physical world. Mental causation is real, not epiphenomenal. This is essential: if consciousness caused nothing, holding conscious agents responsible for physical outcomes would be incoherent.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: The mechanism of conscious causation. Agents select quantum outcomes that physics leaves undetermined. This specifies *where* agent causation operates—at indeterminacies that preserve physical law while allowing mental influence.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Indexical identity matters. *This* agent made *this* choice, and that's the only choice that occurred. Under many-worlds, every choice is made somewhere, and indexical identity has no moral weight. But moral responsibility presupposes that some choices are made and others aren't—that this agent did this thing.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: The metaphysics of agent causation is complex. Critics charge it with positing mysterious powers. But if consciousness is genuinely irreducible, the complexity is warranted. Simple physicalist stories leave out what matters—the agent who chooses.

## Practical Implications

### Criminal Justice

If agent causation grounds desert, retributive punishment is coherent. This doesn't mean harsh punishment is required—mercy, reform, and prevention remain legitimate goals. But the retributivist intuition—that wrongdoers deserve consequences proportional to their wrongs—has metaphysical backing.

However, the framework also supports careful assessment of agency. Did the defendant truly exercise agent-causal power? Mental illness, extreme duress, neurological damage may diminish or eliminate this capacity. Desert-based punishment requires desert-capable agents.

### Moral Education

If agents shape their characters through choices, moral education matters. Teaching children to deliberate well, to recognize and resist vicious temptations, to cultivate virtue—these aren't futile if character is self-created over time. The adult person is partially a product of choices made along the way.

### Self-Understanding

Understanding yourself as an agent-cause changes self-conception. You are not a puppet of prior causes but a genuine originator. Your choices matter not because they feel significant but because you truly authored them. This can inspire or burden—the responsibility is real. But it also dignifies: you are the kind of being whose choices constitute who you are.

## Objections and Responses

**"Agent causation is mysterious."** Yes, in the sense that it's not reducible to event causation. But consciousness is equally mysterious. If we accept irreducible consciousness (as the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] suggests we must), agent causation is no additional mystery—it's consciousness doing something rather than nothing.

**"We can't detect agent causation empirically."** We can't detect consciousness empirically either, yet we're certain we're conscious. The evidence for agent causation is phenomenological (the experience of choice) and argumentative (the failures of deterministic alternatives). Demanding third-person empirical evidence presupposes that only physical events are real.

**"Desert is just retributive vengeance."** Desert may motivate retribution, but they're separable. One might believe people deserve blame while opposing punishment, or believe desert grounds praise and blame but not suffering. The metaphysics of desert is independent of particular punishment practices.

**"Compatibilism is sufficient for moral practice."** Perhaps. But if people *don't* really deserve anything, moral practice rests on useful fictions. Some find this acceptable; others find it undermining. Agent causation offers a framework where moral practice tracks reality.

## Summary

Moral responsibility under agent causation:

- Agents genuinely originate actions through irreducible causal power
- Desert is metaphysically grounded, not merely pragmatic
- Retribution becomes intelligible (though not required)
- Mitigation has limits—prior causes influence but don't determine
- Character responsibility reflects self-creation through choices
- Consciousness is essential: agency requires experience of alternatives, effort, and self-knowledge

This framework respects the ordinary intuition that people deserve praise and blame because they really did what they did—not because treating them as if they did has good consequences. Whether that intuition is correct, the site's framework provides a metaphysics that vindicates it.

## Further Reading

- [[free-will]] — The broader free will question and the site's position
- [[agent-causation]] — Agent vs. event causation in detail
- [[ethics-of-consciousness]] — Consciousness as the foundation of moral status
- [[mental-causation]] — How consciousness can cause physical effects
- [[personal-identity]] — Why *this* agent matters
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments grounding this view

## References

- Chisholm, R. (1964). "Human Freedom and the Self." *The Lindley Lecture*, University of Kansas.
- Fischer, J.M. & Ravizza, M. (1998). *Responsibility and Control*. Cambridge University Press.
- Frankfurt, H. (1971). "Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person." *Journal of Philosophy*.
- Kane, R. (1996). *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- O'Connor, T. (2000). *Persons and Causes*. Oxford University Press.
- Pereboom, D. (2001). *Living Without Free Will*. Cambridge University Press.
- Strawson, P.F. (1962). "Freedom and Resentment." *Proceedings of the British Academy*.

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - moral-responsibility.md with quantum indeterminacy systematization
Task: Cross-review moral-responsibility.md with quantum indeterminacy systematization
Session: 271

obsidian/concepts/moral-responsibility.md, after:

---
title: "Moral Responsibility"
created: 2026-01-16
modified: 2026-01-16
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T05:55:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[ethics-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
  - "[[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Moral responsibility requires that agents deserve praise or blame for their actions. If an agent couldn't have done otherwise, or wasn't the genuine source of their choice, holding them responsible seems unjust. The site's [[agent-causation|agent-causal]] framework grounds moral responsibility differently than compatibilism does: agents are genuine sources of action through [[quantum-consciousness|quantum selection]], making desert metaphysically robust rather than merely pragmatic.

This has practical implications. If agents truly author their choices—not as links in deterministic chains but as initiators of causal sequences—then blame and praise track something real about the agent. Moral responsibility isn't a useful fiction but a response to genuine facts about who caused what.

## The Traditional Problem

Moral responsibility seems to require:

1. **Control**: The agent could have done otherwise
2. **Sourcehood**: The agent, not prior causes, originated the action
3. **Knowledge**: The agent knew (or should have known) what they were doing

Determinism threatens both control and sourcehood. If every event follows necessarily from prior causes, no one could have done otherwise, and no one originates anything—everyone is a link in causal chains stretching back to the Big Bang.

### Compatibilist Response

Compatibilists argue that moral responsibility is compatible with determinism because "could have done otherwise" means "would have done otherwise, if different desires." The relevant control is acting from one's own desires without external coercion. Harry Frankfurt's hierarchical view adds sophistication: you're responsible for actions that flow from desires you reflectively endorse—"second-order" desires about what you want to want.

This captures something real. The psychopath who acts on antisocial desires differs morally from the person coerced at gunpoint. Compatibilism distinguishes them.

But critics argue it doesn't ground *desert*. If your desires were determined by factors you didn't choose—genes, upbringing, neural chemistry—how do you *deserve* blame for acting on them? You couldn't have had different desires. Compatibilism may justify intervention (restraining dangerous people) but not retribution (punishing because they deserve it).

### Libertarian Response

Libertarians argue genuine moral responsibility requires indeterminism—that agents could *really* have done otherwise, not just counterfactually. But mere indeterminism doesn't help: random choices aren't free choices. If my action was undetermined but I didn't determine it, what makes it *mine* rather than a lucky accident?

This is where [[agent-causation|agent causation]] enters. The agent, as a persisting substance, directly causes the action. The causation doesn't reduce to prior events. When I choose to help a friend, *I* caused the helping—not prior mental events that caused decision events that caused movement events. The regress of causes stops at the agent.

## Agent Causation and Desert

Agent causation grounds moral responsibility in a distinctive way:

### Genuine Sourcehood

The agent is the ultimate source of the action. Prior factors (genes, environment, neural states) influenced but didn't determine. The agent determined by exercising irreducible causal power. This satisfies Robert Kane's sourcehood requirement: free agents must be "ultimate creators (or originators) and sustainers" of their choices.

If sourcehood is satisfied, desert becomes intelligible. You deserve blame for the bad action because *you* caused it—not the Big Bang, not your parents, not your neural chemistry. Those influenced you, but the causal buck stops with you.

### Contrastive Explanation

Why did the agent choose A rather than B? The agent-causal answer: because the agent exercised causal power in favor of A. This isn't a non-answer—it's the answer. The agent's choosing is the explanation. Those seeking a deeper explanation (what about the agent made them choose A?) are presupposing event-causal reduction that agent causation rejects.

This matters for responsibility. If we can't explain why the agent chose A rather than B in terms of prior causes, some worry the choice was arbitrary. But agent causalists respond: the agent's reasons guided the choice. The agent chose A because A served their values, responded to considerations that mattered. The reasons didn't *determine* the outcome—alternatives remained possible—but they *guided* it.

### The Luck Objection, Again

The luck objection to libertarian free will applies to moral responsibility. If nothing about the agent explains why they chose to help rather than harm, how do they deserve praise or blame? The difference seems like luck. See [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]] for the full systematization of this challenge and the site's response.

The site's [[free-will#Why the Site's Framework Escapes Luck|response]] addresses this directly. Consciousness-selected indeterminism differs from lucky indeterminism:

| Feature | Lucky Indeterminism | Consciousness-Selected |
|---------|---------------------|------------------------|
| What determines outcome | Nothing (chance) | The agent, for reasons |
| Contrastive explanation | Unavailable | Agent's reasons |
| Basis for desert | Unclear | Agent's genuine authorship |

If selection is reasons-guided, desert is grounded. You deserve blame for the cruel choice because *you* selected cruelty when kindness was available, and you selected it for reasons (malice, indifference) that reflect badly on you.

### The Quantum Zeno Mechanism and Genuine Control

The [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will#The Quantum Zeno Mechanism in Detail|quantum Zeno mechanism]] provides the physical account of how consciousness selects. Mental effort—sustained attention—acts like repeated quantum measurement, holding selected neural patterns stable against decoherence. This directly grounds the *control* requirement for moral responsibility.

Key features supporting responsibility:

1. **Selection, not randomness**: The agent doesn't receive random outcomes but selects among genuinely open possibilities based on what matters to them

2. **Phenomenology of effort tracks causation**: William James documented that "sustained voluntary attention is a repetition of successive efforts." The felt difficulty of choosing well corresponds to genuine causal engagement—holding the chosen option stable against competing alternatives

3. **Two-domain evidence**: Both [[attention-as-interface|attention]] and [[motor-selection|motor control]] show identical selection architecture (frontal theta oscillations, ~300ms deployment time, distinct willed-vs-instructed signatures). Two independent domains showing the same structure suggests consciousness genuinely selects, not that we merely attribute selection to coincidental outcomes

4. **Kane's convergence**: Robert Kane's 2024 *Complex Tapestry of Free Will* now incorporates agent-causal elements alongside his event-causal framework, arguing free action requires "exercising teleological guidance control over some of their processes." This represents mainstream libertarianism converging on the site's agent-causal position

The control requirement isn't satisfied by mere indeterminism—random processes don't put agents in control. But consciousness-directed selection, operating through the quantum Zeno mechanism, provides exactly what responsibility requires: the agent genuinely determined the outcome from among real alternatives.

## How Desert Differs Under Agent Causation

Compatibilist desert is pragmatic: holding people responsible has good consequences (deterrence, reform, social coordination). Whether anyone *really* deserves anything in a deeper sense is set aside.

Agent-causal desert is metaphysical: people really deserve praise and blame because they really originated their actions. This has several implications:

### Retribution Becomes Intelligible

Retributive punishment—punishment because the wrongdoer deserves it, not just for deterrence or reform—requires that the wrongdoer merits suffering for what they did. Under compatibilism, it's hard to see why anyone merits suffering for actions that couldn't have been otherwise.

Under agent causation, retribution is intelligible. The wrongdoer exercised their power to cause harm when they could have caused good. They deserve consequences proportional to what they did and who they are. This doesn't prove retribution is *right*—one might reject it on other grounds—but it makes it coherent.

### Mitigation Has Limits

Compatibilism tends toward excusing conditions: the more we understand the causes of behavior, the less responsible agents seem. If neural abnormality caused the violence, if childhood trauma caused the cruelty, if addiction caused the theft—where does responsibility remain?

Agent causation limits this trend. Prior causes influenced but didn't determine. The agent still selected. Understanding etiology helps assess what the agent could control, but doesn't eliminate responsibility entirely. The addict who steals chose to steal, even if addiction made resisting harder. Difficulty doesn't equal impossibility. If the agent could have resisted—if some addicts do resist—the choice not to resist was still theirs.

This doesn't eliminate all mitigation. Agents who couldn't understand their actions (young children, psychotic individuals) may lack the knowledge requirement. Agents under extreme duress have responsibility diminished. But the general trend—toward explaining away responsibility via causal history—is resisted.

### Character Responsibility

We hold people responsible not just for individual acts but for who they are. The generous person is praiseworthy; the malicious person is blameworthy. But if character is produced by unchosen factors, how is this fair?

Agent causation provides an answer: character is partly self-created. Each choice reinforces or modifies dispositions. The compassionate person became compassionate through repeated compassionate choices—choices they made, not choices that were made in them. Over time, the agent shapes who they become.

This doesn't mean we're responsible for our initial characters (shaped before we could choose). But we are responsible for what we make of them. The agent who recognizes their vicious dispositions and works to change them deserves praise; the agent who cultivates vicious dispositions deserves blame.

## The Role of Consciousness

Moral responsibility on this framework requires consciousness. The agent that sources action is a conscious being with [[mental-causation|mental causation]]. Several features matter:

### Experience of Alternatives

Conscious choice involves experiencing alternatives as live options. When you deliberate, multiple possibilities present themselves—you could help or ignore, tell the truth or lie. This phenomenology of open alternatives grounds the intuition that you could have done otherwise. Under agent causation, the phenomenology tracks reality: the alternatives were genuinely possible.

### Phenomenology of Effort

The [[mental-effort|phenomenology of effort]] supports responsibility. Choosing feels effortful—maintaining focus, resisting temptation, following through. If choices were merely determined by prior causes, effort phenomenology would be epiphenomenal decoration. But if agents genuinely cause their choices, effort reflects real engagement. The felt difficulty of doing right corresponds to genuine exercise of causal power against countervailing forces.

### Self-Knowledge

Responsible agents know what they're doing. Consciousness provides this: you experience your intentions, anticipate consequences, recognize the meaning of your actions. This knowledge grounds the epistemic requirement for responsibility. Unconscious processes don't bear responsibility because nothing in them knows or chooses.

## Relation to Site Tenets

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: If consciousness is irreducible to physical processes, conscious agents aren't merely complex physical systems. They're substances capable of genuine causal origination. This grounds the metaphysics of agent causation.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Consciousness causally influences the physical world. Mental causation is real, not epiphenomenal. This is essential: if consciousness caused nothing, holding conscious agents responsible for physical outcomes would be incoherent.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: The mechanism of conscious causation. Agents select quantum outcomes that physics leaves undetermined. This specifies *where* agent causation operates—at indeterminacies that preserve physical law while allowing mental influence.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Indexical identity matters. *This* agent made *this* choice, and that's the only choice that occurred. Under many-worlds, every choice is made somewhere, and indexical identity has no moral weight. But moral responsibility presupposes that some choices are made and others aren't—that this agent did this thing.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: The metaphysics of agent causation is complex. Critics charge it with positing mysterious powers. But if consciousness is genuinely irreducible, the complexity is warranted. Simple physicalist stories leave out what matters—the agent who chooses.

## Practical Implications

### Criminal Justice

If agent causation grounds desert, retributive punishment is coherent. This doesn't mean harsh punishment is required—mercy, reform, and prevention remain legitimate goals. But the retributivist intuition—that wrongdoers deserve consequences proportional to their wrongs—has metaphysical backing.

However, the framework also supports careful assessment of agency. Did the defendant truly exercise agent-causal power? Mental illness, extreme duress, neurological damage may diminish or eliminate this capacity. Desert-based punishment requires desert-capable agents.

### Moral Education

If agents shape their characters through choices, moral education matters. Teaching children to deliberate well, to recognize and resist vicious temptations, to cultivate virtue—these aren't futile if character is self-created over time. The adult person is partially a product of choices made along the way.

### Self-Understanding

Understanding yourself as an agent-cause changes self-conception. You are not a puppet of prior causes but a genuine originator. Your choices matter not because they feel significant but because you truly authored them. This can inspire or burden—the responsibility is real. But it also dignifies: you are the kind of being whose choices constitute who you are.

## Objections and Responses

**"Agent causation is mysterious."** Yes, in the sense that it's not reducible to event causation. But consciousness is equally mysterious. If we accept irreducible consciousness (as the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] suggests we must), agent causation is no additional mystery—it's consciousness doing something rather than nothing.

**"We can't detect agent causation empirically."** We can't detect consciousness empirically either, yet we're certain we're conscious. The evidence for agent causation is phenomenological (the experience of choice) and argumentative (the failures of deterministic alternatives). Demanding third-person empirical evidence presupposes that only physical events are real.

**"Desert is just retributive vengeance."** Desert may motivate retribution, but they're separable. One might believe people deserve blame while opposing punishment, or believe desert grounds praise and blame but not suffering. The metaphysics of desert is independent of particular punishment practices.

**"Compatibilism is sufficient for moral practice."** Perhaps. But if people *don't* really deserve anything, moral practice rests on useful fictions. Some find this acceptable; others find it undermining. Agent causation offers a framework where moral practice tracks reality.

## Summary

Moral responsibility under agent causation:

- Agents genuinely originate actions through irreducible causal power
- Desert is metaphysically grounded, not merely pragmatic
- Retribution becomes intelligible (though not required)
- Mitigation has limits—prior causes influence but don't determine
- Character responsibility reflects self-creation through choices
- Consciousness is essential: agency requires experience of alternatives, effort, and self-knowledge

This framework respects the ordinary intuition that people deserve praise and blame because they really did what they did—not because treating them as if they did has good consequences. Whether that intuition is correct, the site's framework provides a metaphysics that vindicates it.

## Further Reading

- [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]] — Systematization of how quantum indeterminacy supports libertarian free will and responds to the luck objection
- [[free-will]] — The broader free will question and the site's position
- [[agent-causation]] — Agent vs. event causation in detail
- [[ethics-of-consciousness]] — Consciousness as the foundation of moral status
- [[mental-causation]] — How consciousness can cause physical effects
- [[personal-identity]] — Why *this* agent matters
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments grounding this view

## References

- Chisholm, R. (1964). "Human Freedom and the Self." *The Lindley Lecture*, University of Kansas.
- Fischer, J.M. & Ravizza, M. (1998). *Responsibility and Control*. Cambridge University Press.
- Frankfurt, H. (1971). "Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person." *Journal of Philosophy*.
- Kane, R. (1996). *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- O'Connor, T. (2000). *Persons and Causes*. Oxford University Press.
- Pereboom, D. (2001). *Living Without Free Will*. Cambridge University Press.
- Strawson, P.F. (1962). "Freedom and Resentment." *Proceedings of the British Academy*.
