obsidian/concepts/mysterianism.md, before:

---
title: "Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure"
created: 2026-01-15
modified: 2026-01-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T03:20:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[mysterianism-cognitive-closure-2026-01-14]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[whether-real]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Mysterianism is the view that the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem of consciousness]] cannot be solved by human minds—not because consciousness is supernatural but because our cognitive architecture lacks the resources to grasp the solution. Colin McGinn formalized this position in 1989 through the concept of "cognitive closure": just as rats cannot do calculus and dogs cannot understand quantum mechanics, humans may be permanently unable to understand how consciousness relates to the brain. The solution might exist; we just can't reach it.

This position occupies important middle ground. Unlike eliminativism, mysterianism takes consciousness seriously as a real phenomenon requiring explanation. Unlike confident physicalism or dualism, it acknowledges the depth of the problem. The position strongly supports the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet: our sense of which explanations are "simple" may reflect our cognitive limitations rather than reality.

## Cognitive Closure

McGinn's key concept is cognitive closure. A type of mind M is cognitively closed with respect to a property P if M's concept-forming procedures cannot extend to a grasp of P. The property exists; M simply cannot conceive it.

This isn't about intelligence within a domain—it's about which domains are accessible at all. A very intelligent rat might do amazing things with mazes and social hierarchies. But no amount of rat intelligence grants access to differential equations. The conceptual apparatus isn't there.

McGinn proposes that humans are cognitively closed with respect to property "P"—whatever property of the brain explains how neural activity gives rise to conscious experience. We access consciousness through introspection and brain through perception, but neither mode of access reveals how they connect. The solution to the mind-body problem might be natural, even simple—but closed to beings like us.

## Nagel's Bat

Thomas Nagel anticipated mysterianism in his 1974 paper "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" His central observation: understanding bat consciousness would require grasping what echolocation is *like* from the inside. But we cannot imagine this. We can imagine hanging upside down, eating insects, even navigating by sound—but these are *our* experiences wearing bat costumes. The subjective character of bat experience remains inaccessible.

Nagel's broader point: objective scientific methods cannot capture subjective experience without loss. To understand consciousness objectively, we would have to abstract away from viewpoints—but viewpoints are precisely what we're trying to understand. The gap isn't merely current ignorance. It's structural.

This leads to what Nagel calls a "conceptual revolution" that may be needed but which we cannot even conceive. We know the current conceptual framework fails. We don't know what would succeed.

## Problems Versus Mysteries

Noam Chomsky offered a related distinction between "problems" and "mysteries." Problems are difficulties that fall within our cognitive capacities—we can in principle solve them through systematic investigation. Mysteries lie beyond our cognitive reach, like number theory for cats or calculus for dogs.

Chomsky argued there's no reason to assume human cognitive capacities are unlimited. We're biological organisms with specific cognitive architectures shaped by evolution for specific purposes. Some questions may fall outside what that architecture can handle.

Consciousness might be such a mystery. The [[explanatory-gap]] persists despite centuries of philosophical and scientific effort. Perhaps it persists not because we haven't tried hard enough but because trying harder won't help. The gap may be our cognitive closure made visible.

## The Phenomenology of Cognitive Closure

Mysterianism proposes cognitive closure as a theoretical concept—but what does it feel like to approach a cognitive limit? The [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|voids article on edge-phenomenology]] maps this territory using evidence from contemplative practice, psychedelics, and philosophical inquiry. What emerges suggests that cognitive closure has experiential signatures we can investigate.

When consciousness approaches limits through different means, remarkably consistent features appear: ineffability combined with felt knowledge (you know something you cannot articulate), ego dissolution paired with enhanced clarity, temporal distortion alongside a sense of unbounded possibility. These are not merely failures of thought but distinctive experiences in their own right.

Metzinger's work on "minimal phenomenal experience" describes a *zero-person perspective*: awareness continues but without the usual subject-object structure. Experience becomes non-conceptual, atemporal, non-egoic—yet reports consistently describe it as more vivid than ordinary experience. This may be consciousness operating near its boundaries, with content stripped away but awareness intact.

The cross-method convergence matters epistemically. If such experiences were merely meditation artifacts or drug effects, we would not expect them across such different approaches. The consistency suggests these are features of consciousness itself at its limits—not artefacts of particular methods.

For mysterianism, this offers something unexpected: phenomenological evidence that cognitive closure is real and has a distinctive structure. McGinn argues theoretically that certain properties lie beyond our conceptual reach. Edge-phenomenology suggests we can *experience* that boundary—we encounter something at the limit, even if we cannot bring conceptual content back from it. The [[thoughts-that-slip-away|dissolving-insight phenomenon]]—thoughts that exist only at the boundary and vanish completely upon return—may mark encounters with representationally closed territory.

This transforms the question. We need not merely speculate about cognitive closure from the armchair. We can approach it experientially and map its features, even if we cannot cross it. Cognitive closure has a phenomenology, and that phenomenology is data.

## What the Limits Reveal

Rather than treating cognitive closure as mere frustration, a deeper insight emerges: the *shape* of our limitations reveals the *structure* of our minds. Chomsky, McGinn, Nagel, and Kant converge on this idea from different directions. See [[limits-reveal-structure]] for extended treatment.

The key inversion: what we cannot think is as informative about cognitive architecture as what we can. The endowment that yields scope also establishes limits. Any mind powerful enough to think some thoughts is thereby prevented from thinking others. The pattern of mysteries illuminates the architecture of the mystery-haver.

This transforms mysterianism from pessimism into method. If we map *where* thought systematically fails—where concepts refuse to form, where the same problems remain mysteries across cultures and centuries—we trace the shape of human cognition itself. Cognitive closure isn't just what blocks us; it's what defines us.

For the site's [[voids]] framework, this is crucial. Mapping void territory (the unthinkable) becomes a way of mapping mind territory (the thinker). The blindspot isn't empty absence—it's structured absence, revealing architecture by silhouette.

## Can We Know If the Limits Are Real?

A deeper challenge to mysterianism asks whether we can determine if cognitive limits are genuine or merely apparent. The [[whether-real|voids article on this question]] reveals a peculiar epistemic situation: the question itself may be undecidable from within any limited cognitive system.

The problem has a self-referential structure:

1. To determine if limits are real, we must use our cognitive faculties
2. If those faculties are limited, our determination may be systematically wrong
3. We cannot step outside our faculties to check from a neutral position
4. Therefore the question cannot be conclusively answered from within

This is not ordinary empirical uncertainty. It is structural. The tool examining its own limitations cannot establish whether those limitations are genuine or merely apparent. The inference problem is asymmetric: progress on a problem proves contingency for that problem, but lack of progress never proves permanent closure. We can never be certain we aren't being limited by an undetectable limit.

Three positions emerge:

**The Optimist** (Dennett): Cognitive closure remains undemonstrated. McGinn should provide an empirical example of a creature that grasps a question but cannot grasp its answer. Without such examples, "unimaginable" slides illegitimately into "impossible." Past mysteries—vitalism, atomism—dissolved when right concepts emerged.

**The Pessimist** (McGinn, Chomsky): Cognitive limits follow from basic biology. Any endowment providing scope also imposes limits. "If there were no limits to human intelligence," Chomsky writes, "it would lack internal structure, and would therefore have no scope." The persistence of the hard problem across centuries is weak evidence for permanent closure.

**The Suspended**: The question itself may be formally undecidable. A sufficiently deep cognitive closure would hide itself. Both verification (solving the problem) and falsification (proving permanent closure) seem blocked. This isn't agnosticism from laziness but from logical necessity.

For the site's purposes, the suspended position has a virtue: recognising that we cannot determine whether limits are permanent mandates epistemic humility. If we cannot know what we cannot know, we cannot assume our current best theories are close to final truth.

## Temporary Versus Permanent

A key distinction within mysterianism:

**Temporary mysterianism** holds that current science cannot explain consciousness, but future paradigm shifts might bridge the gap. New concepts, new methods, new frameworks—something will eventually click. The mystery is practical, not principled.

**Permanent mysterianism** holds that cognitive closure is permanent. No amount of scientific progress will solve the problem for beings like us. We might build artificial intelligences that solve it, or encounter alien minds that understand it—but *we* never will.

From our current perspective, both positions look identical. We can't know in advance which problems are permanently closed. But the distinction matters for how we interpret our situation. Temporary mysterians see the hard problem as a challenge; permanent mysterians see it as a limit.

## Mysterianism's Virtues

The position has several attractive features:

**Takes consciousness seriously**. Unlike [[illusionism]] or eliminativism, mysterianism accepts that phenomenal experience is real and genuinely puzzling. Something needs explaining. The failure is ours, not the phenomenon's.

**Intellectually honest**. Rather than claiming to solve what remains unsolved, mysterianism acknowledges the depth of our ignorance. After centuries of failure, perhaps humility is appropriate.

**Explains the explanatory gap**. If we're cognitively closed to the property linking mind and brain, the [[explanatory-gap]] is exactly what we'd expect. We can describe both sides without seeing the connection—because the connection lies outside our conceptual reach.

**Neutral on ontology**. Mysterianism doesn't require commitment to physicalism or dualism. The solution might be physicalist (some natural property P explains consciousness) or dualist (consciousness is irreducible) or something we can't conceive. All positions remain open.

## Criticisms

### The Defeatism Objection

Daniel Dennett and the Churchlands argue that mysterianism discourages investigation. Declaring a problem unsolvable encourages giving up prematurely. We cannot know in advance what problems are unsolvable, so we should keep trying.

The mysterian response: intellectual honesty isn't defeatism. We can continue investigating consciousness while acknowledging that success isn't guaranteed. And noting that centuries of effort have yielded little progress is observation, not surrender.

### The Vitalism Analogy

Critics note that "life" once seemed as mysterious as consciousness. Vitalists thought some *élan vital* explained living matter. But biology explained life through chemistry and physics—no mystery remained. Perhaps consciousness will follow.

The mysterian response: consciousness differs from life. Life's "mystery" was explaining coordinated behavior and reproduction—functional properties that turned out to be mechanistically explicable. Consciousness's mystery is explaining why there's subjective experience at all. That's not a functional property; it's the existence of an inner perspective. The analogy fails.

### The Squirrel Objection

If McGinn's argument works, why doesn't it apply everywhere? Why think consciousness is specially closed when we successfully understand many things?

The mysterian response: we succeed with properties that fall within our cognitive reach. Consciousness happens to fall outside it. This isn't surprising—some properties must fall outside any finite cognitive architecture. The question is which ones. The persistence of the hard problem suggests consciousness is among them.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Mysterianism aligns strongly with the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet. McGinn's position exemplifies exactly what the tenet asserts: our sense of which explanations are "simple" may reflect cognitive limitations rather than ontological facts. When physicalism seems simpler than dualism, that may mean only that we're closed to the complexity involved.

On [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]], mysterianism is officially neutral—but compatible. Mysterians accept that consciousness is real and requires explanation, aligning with the rejection of eliminativism. McGinn doesn't commit to dualism, but his acknowledgment that introspection and perception reveal different aspects of reality resonates with dualist intuitions.

This site goes further than mysterianism. Where mysterians remain agnostic about consciousness's nature, the site commits to irreducibility (Dualism) and causal efficacy ([[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]). Where mysterians suggest we cannot know how mind relates to matter, the site proposes [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] as a mechanism.

These commitments might be wrong—mysterianism warns that certainty exceeds our cognitive warrant. But the site's tenets are presented as commitments, not proofs. Mysterianism's humility is compatible with tentative positions. We can acknowledge our limits while still making our best guesses.

The site's [[voids]] framework resonates with mysterian themes. McGinn's property "P" might be void territory—something that exists but lies beyond our conceptual reach. The difference: the voids framework suggests we can map the *edges* of void territory through apophatic methods, tracing what we cannot think. Mysterianism is more pessimistic, suggesting we can't even identify what we're missing.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge]] — What cognitive closure feels like from the inside (edge-experience signatures)
- [[limits-reveal-structure]] — How cognitive limits reveal cognitive architecture (detailed treatment)
- [[whether-real]] — Can we know if the voids are genuinely permanent?
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The problem mysterians think is unsolvable
- [[explanatory-gap]] — The conceptual gap that may reflect cognitive closure
- [[qualia]] — The subjective properties at the heart of the mystery
- [[illusionism]] — The rival view that consciousness isn't real
- [[voids]] — The site's framework for approaching cognitive limits
- [[tenets]] — How this site's commitments compare with mysterian neutrality

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219.
- Dennett, D. C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
- Flanagan, O. (1991). *The Science of the Mind*. MIT Press.
- McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- McGinn, C. (1999). *The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World*. Basic Books.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - mysterianism.md with minimal-consciousness insights
Task: Cross-review mysterianism.md with minimal-consciousness findings
Session: 307

obsidian/concepts/mysterianism.md, after:

---
title: "Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure"
created: 2026-01-15
modified: 2026-01-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T11:10:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[minimal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[mysterianism-cognitive-closure-2026-01-14]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[whether-real]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Mysterianism is the view that the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem of consciousness]] cannot be solved by human minds—not because consciousness is supernatural but because our cognitive architecture lacks the resources to grasp the solution. Colin McGinn formalized this position in 1989 through the concept of "cognitive closure": just as rats cannot do calculus and dogs cannot understand quantum mechanics, humans may be permanently unable to understand how consciousness relates to the brain. The solution might exist; we just can't reach it.

This position occupies important middle ground. Unlike eliminativism, mysterianism takes consciousness seriously as a real phenomenon requiring explanation. Unlike confident physicalism or dualism, it acknowledges the depth of the problem. The position strongly supports the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet: our sense of which explanations are "simple" may reflect our cognitive limitations rather than reality.

## Cognitive Closure

McGinn's key concept is cognitive closure. A type of mind M is cognitively closed with respect to a property P if M's concept-forming procedures cannot extend to a grasp of P. The property exists; M simply cannot conceive it.

This isn't about intelligence within a domain—it's about which domains are accessible at all. A very intelligent rat might do amazing things with mazes and social hierarchies. But no amount of rat intelligence grants access to differential equations. The conceptual apparatus isn't there.

McGinn proposes that humans are cognitively closed with respect to property "P"—whatever property of the brain explains how neural activity gives rise to conscious experience. We access consciousness through introspection and brain through perception, but neither mode of access reveals how they connect. The solution to the mind-body problem might be natural, even simple—but closed to beings like us.

## Nagel's Bat

Thomas Nagel anticipated mysterianism in his 1974 paper "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" His central observation: understanding bat consciousness would require grasping what echolocation is *like* from the inside. But we cannot imagine this. We can imagine hanging upside down, eating insects, even navigating by sound—but these are *our* experiences wearing bat costumes. The subjective character of bat experience remains inaccessible.

Nagel's broader point: objective scientific methods cannot capture subjective experience without loss. To understand consciousness objectively, we would have to abstract away from viewpoints—but viewpoints are precisely what we're trying to understand. The gap isn't merely current ignorance. It's structural.

This leads to what Nagel calls a "conceptual revolution" that may be needed but which we cannot even conceive. We know the current conceptual framework fails. We don't know what would succeed.

## Simple Minds and Complete Knowledge

Research on [[minimal-consciousness|minimal consciousness]]—consciousness in simple organisms—provides striking evidence for cognitive closure. Consider *C. elegans*, the roundworm whose entire nervous system has been mapped: 302 neurons, 8,000 chemical synapses, 890 gap junctions. We possess complete structural knowledge. Yet we cannot determine whether the worm experiences anything at all.

This is McGinn's point made empirically. Complete knowledge of neural architecture doesn't bridge the gap to phenomenal facts. We can describe every synapse, trace every circuit, model every firing pattern—and still cannot answer whether there is something it is like to be *C. elegans*. If complete structural description doesn't reveal consciousness in a 302-neuron organism, why expect it to reveal consciousness in an 86-billion-neuron brain?

The situation is worse than mere ignorance. The Unlimited Associative Learning (UAL) framework offers behavioural criteria for consciousness—but researchers explicitly note that an organism might have phenomenal experience without displaying UAL capacities, or display sophisticated behaviour without experience. We have markers, not detectors. We can identify correlates of consciousness without grasping what consciousness *is*—exactly the situation McGinn predicts if we're cognitively closed to the relevant property.

The *distribution problem*—why does *this* level of complexity produce experience rather than some other?—compounds the mystery. If consciousness emerges at some threshold, the threshold seems arbitrary. Why not at 30 neurons? At 3,000? At none? Any answer presupposes understanding we don't have. The question may not be answerable by beings like us, because we lack conceptual access to whatever makes the difference.

Simple organisms reveal the explanatory gap at its starkest. We map everything and understand nothing about what matters most. This is what cognitive closure looks like from the inside.

## Problems Versus Mysteries

Noam Chomsky offered a related distinction between "problems" and "mysteries." Problems are difficulties that fall within our cognitive capacities—we can in principle solve them through systematic investigation. Mysteries lie beyond our cognitive reach, like number theory for cats or calculus for dogs.

Chomsky argued there's no reason to assume human cognitive capacities are unlimited. We're biological organisms with specific cognitive architectures shaped by evolution for specific purposes. Some questions may fall outside what that architecture can handle.

Consciousness might be such a mystery. The [[explanatory-gap]] persists despite centuries of philosophical and scientific effort. Perhaps it persists not because we haven't tried hard enough but because trying harder won't help. The gap may be our cognitive closure made visible.

## The Phenomenology of Cognitive Closure

Mysterianism proposes cognitive closure as a theoretical concept—but what does it feel like to approach a cognitive limit? The [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|voids article on edge-phenomenology]] maps this territory using evidence from contemplative practice, psychedelics, and philosophical inquiry. What emerges suggests that cognitive closure has experiential signatures we can investigate.

When consciousness approaches limits through different means, remarkably consistent features appear: ineffability combined with felt knowledge (you know something you cannot articulate), ego dissolution paired with enhanced clarity, temporal distortion alongside a sense of unbounded possibility. These are not merely failures of thought but distinctive experiences in their own right.

Metzinger's work on "minimal phenomenal experience" describes a *zero-person perspective*: awareness continues but without the usual subject-object structure. Experience becomes non-conceptual, atemporal, non-egoic—yet reports consistently describe it as more vivid than ordinary experience. This may be consciousness operating near its boundaries, with content stripped away but awareness intact.

The cross-method convergence matters epistemically. If such experiences were merely meditation artifacts or drug effects, we would not expect them across such different approaches. The consistency suggests these are features of consciousness itself at its limits—not artefacts of particular methods.

For mysterianism, this offers something unexpected: phenomenological evidence that cognitive closure is real and has a distinctive structure. McGinn argues theoretically that certain properties lie beyond our conceptual reach. Edge-phenomenology suggests we can *experience* that boundary—we encounter something at the limit, even if we cannot bring conceptual content back from it. The [[thoughts-that-slip-away|dissolving-insight phenomenon]]—thoughts that exist only at the boundary and vanish completely upon return—may mark encounters with representationally closed territory.

This transforms the question. We need not merely speculate about cognitive closure from the armchair. We can approach it experientially and map its features, even if we cannot cross it. Cognitive closure has a phenomenology, and that phenomenology is data.

## What the Limits Reveal

Rather than treating cognitive closure as mere frustration, a deeper insight emerges: the *shape* of our limitations reveals the *structure* of our minds. Chomsky, McGinn, Nagel, and Kant converge on this idea from different directions. See [[limits-reveal-structure]] for extended treatment.

The key inversion: what we cannot think is as informative about cognitive architecture as what we can. The endowment that yields scope also establishes limits. Any mind powerful enough to think some thoughts is thereby prevented from thinking others. The pattern of mysteries illuminates the architecture of the mystery-haver.

This transforms mysterianism from pessimism into method. If we map *where* thought systematically fails—where concepts refuse to form, where the same problems remain mysteries across cultures and centuries—we trace the shape of human cognition itself. Cognitive closure isn't just what blocks us; it's what defines us.

For the site's [[voids]] framework, this is crucial. Mapping void territory (the unthinkable) becomes a way of mapping mind territory (the thinker). The blindspot isn't empty absence—it's structured absence, revealing architecture by silhouette.

## Can We Know If the Limits Are Real?

A deeper challenge to mysterianism asks whether we can determine if cognitive limits are genuine or merely apparent. The [[whether-real|voids article on this question]] reveals a peculiar epistemic situation: the question itself may be undecidable from within any limited cognitive system.

The problem has a self-referential structure:

1. To determine if limits are real, we must use our cognitive faculties
2. If those faculties are limited, our determination may be systematically wrong
3. We cannot step outside our faculties to check from a neutral position
4. Therefore the question cannot be conclusively answered from within

This is not ordinary empirical uncertainty. It is structural. The tool examining its own limitations cannot establish whether those limitations are genuine or merely apparent. The inference problem is asymmetric: progress on a problem proves contingency for that problem, but lack of progress never proves permanent closure. We can never be certain we aren't being limited by an undetectable limit.

Three positions emerge:

**The Optimist** (Dennett): Cognitive closure remains undemonstrated. McGinn should provide an empirical example of a creature that grasps a question but cannot grasp its answer. Without such examples, "unimaginable" slides illegitimately into "impossible." Past mysteries—vitalism, atomism—dissolved when right concepts emerged.

**The Pessimist** (McGinn, Chomsky): Cognitive limits follow from basic biology. Any endowment providing scope also imposes limits. "If there were no limits to human intelligence," Chomsky writes, "it would lack internal structure, and would therefore have no scope." The persistence of the hard problem across centuries is weak evidence for permanent closure.

**The Suspended**: The question itself may be formally undecidable. A sufficiently deep cognitive closure would hide itself. Both verification (solving the problem) and falsification (proving permanent closure) seem blocked. This isn't agnosticism from laziness but from logical necessity.

For the site's purposes, the suspended position has a virtue: recognising that we cannot determine whether limits are permanent mandates epistemic humility. If we cannot know what we cannot know, we cannot assume our current best theories are close to final truth.

## Temporary Versus Permanent

A key distinction within mysterianism:

**Temporary mysterianism** holds that current science cannot explain consciousness, but future paradigm shifts might bridge the gap. New concepts, new methods, new frameworks—something will eventually click. The mystery is practical, not principled.

**Permanent mysterianism** holds that cognitive closure is permanent. No amount of scientific progress will solve the problem for beings like us. We might build artificial intelligences that solve it, or encounter alien minds that understand it—but *we* never will.

From our current perspective, both positions look identical. We can't know in advance which problems are permanently closed. But the distinction matters for how we interpret our situation. Temporary mysterians see the hard problem as a challenge; permanent mysterians see it as a limit.

## Mysterianism's Virtues

The position has several attractive features:

**Takes consciousness seriously**. Unlike [[illusionism]] or eliminativism, mysterianism accepts that phenomenal experience is real and genuinely puzzling. Something needs explaining. The failure is ours, not the phenomenon's.

**Intellectually honest**. Rather than claiming to solve what remains unsolved, mysterianism acknowledges the depth of our ignorance. After centuries of failure, perhaps humility is appropriate.

**Explains the explanatory gap**. If we're cognitively closed to the property linking mind and brain, the [[explanatory-gap]] is exactly what we'd expect. We can describe both sides without seeing the connection—because the connection lies outside our conceptual reach.

**Neutral on ontology**. Mysterianism doesn't require commitment to physicalism or dualism. The solution might be physicalist (some natural property P explains consciousness) or dualist (consciousness is irreducible) or something we can't conceive. All positions remain open.

## Criticisms

### The Defeatism Objection

Daniel Dennett and the Churchlands argue that mysterianism discourages investigation. Declaring a problem unsolvable encourages giving up prematurely. We cannot know in advance what problems are unsolvable, so we should keep trying.

The mysterian response: intellectual honesty isn't defeatism. We can continue investigating consciousness while acknowledging that success isn't guaranteed. And noting that centuries of effort have yielded little progress is observation, not surrender.

### The Vitalism Analogy

Critics note that "life" once seemed as mysterious as consciousness. Vitalists thought some *élan vital* explained living matter. But biology explained life through chemistry and physics—no mystery remained. Perhaps consciousness will follow.

The mysterian response: consciousness differs from life. Life's "mystery" was explaining coordinated behavior and reproduction—functional properties that turned out to be mechanistically explicable. Consciousness's mystery is explaining why there's subjective experience at all. That's not a functional property; it's the existence of an inner perspective. The analogy fails.

### The Squirrel Objection

If McGinn's argument works, why doesn't it apply everywhere? Why think consciousness is specially closed when we successfully understand many things?

The mysterian response: we succeed with properties that fall within our cognitive reach. Consciousness happens to fall outside it. This isn't surprising—some properties must fall outside any finite cognitive architecture. The question is which ones. The persistence of the hard problem suggests consciousness is among them.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Mysterianism aligns strongly with the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet. McGinn's position exemplifies exactly what the tenet asserts: our sense of which explanations are "simple" may reflect cognitive limitations rather than ontological facts. When physicalism seems simpler than dualism, that may mean only that we're closed to the complexity involved.

On [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]], mysterianism is officially neutral—but compatible. Mysterians accept that consciousness is real and requires explanation, aligning with the rejection of eliminativism. McGinn doesn't commit to dualism, but his acknowledgment that introspection and perception reveal different aspects of reality resonates with dualist intuitions.

This site goes further than mysterianism. Where mysterians remain agnostic about consciousness's nature, the site commits to irreducibility (Dualism) and causal efficacy ([[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]). Where mysterians suggest we cannot know how mind relates to matter, the site proposes [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] as a mechanism.

These commitments might be wrong—mysterianism warns that certainty exceeds our cognitive warrant. But the site's tenets are presented as commitments, not proofs. Mysterianism's humility is compatible with tentative positions. We can acknowledge our limits while still making our best guesses.

The site's [[voids]] framework resonates with mysterian themes. McGinn's property "P" might be void territory—something that exists but lies beyond our conceptual reach. The difference: the voids framework suggests we can map the *edges* of void territory through apophatic methods, tracing what we cannot think. Mysterianism is more pessimistic, suggesting we can't even identify what we're missing.

## Further Reading

- [[minimal-consciousness]] — Complete neural mapping yet unknowable experience (empirical evidence for cognitive closure)
- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge]] — What cognitive closure feels like from the inside (edge-experience signatures)
- [[limits-reveal-structure]] — How cognitive limits reveal cognitive architecture (detailed treatment)
- [[whether-real]] — Can we know if the voids are genuinely permanent?
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The problem mysterians think is unsolvable
- [[explanatory-gap]] — The conceptual gap that may reflect cognitive closure
- [[qualia]] — The subjective properties at the heart of the mystery
- [[illusionism]] — The rival view that consciousness isn't real
- [[voids]] — The site's framework for approaching cognitive limits
- [[tenets]] — How this site's commitments compare with mysterian neutrality

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219.
- Dennett, D. C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
- Flanagan, O. (1991). *The Science of the Mind*. MIT Press.
- McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- McGinn, C. (1999). *The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World*. Basic Books.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.
