obsidian/concepts/neural-quantum-coherence.md, before:

---
title: "Neural Quantum Coherence"
created: 2026-01-18
modified: 2026-01-18
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-25T00:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[binding-problem]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[decoherence]]"
  - "[[quantum-biology]]"
  - "[[measurement-problem]]"
  - "[[quantum-coherence-protection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[quantum-superposition-brain-consciousness-2026-01-18]]"
  - "[[neural-binding-quantum-entanglement-2026-01-19]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-18
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-25T00:00:00+00:00
---

Can quantum superposition persist in neural tissue long enough to matter for consciousness? Recent experimental evidence (2024-2025) answers with qualified optimism: microtubule-stabilising drugs delay anaesthetic-induced unconsciousness, revised decoherence estimates extend coherence times by seven orders of magnitude beyond initial calculations, MRI studies detect entanglement signatures correlating with consciousness, and multiple protective mechanisms have been identified. The debate has shifted from "whether" to "how"—from categorical dismissal to empirical investigation. This matters for the [[binding-problem|binding problem]]: if quantum entanglement provides genuine physical holism—where the whole is irreducible to parts—it may explain how distributed neural processes combine into unified experience.

## The Challenge

Max Tegmark's 2000 calculation became the standard objection to [[quantum-consciousness|quantum consciousness theories]]. He estimated that quantum coherence in brain microtubules would decay in about 10⁻¹³ seconds (100 femtoseconds). Neural processes operate on millisecond timescales—a gap of ten billion times. This seemed decisive: quantum effects simply cannot persist long enough in warm, wet neural tissue.

The calculation assumed:
- Thermal equilibrium (appropriate for dead tissue)
- 24 nanometre superposition separations
- Free interaction with the aqueous environment

These assumptions are questionable for living neural systems.

## Revised Estimates

Hagan, Hameroff, and Tuszynski (2002) challenged Tegmark's model:

1. **Wrong separation distances**: Orch OR proposes smaller superposition separations than Tegmark assumed
2. **Wrong interaction type**: Tegmark used charge-charge interactions; microtubule superpositions involve dipole interactions
3. **Temperature paradox**: Tegmark's model predicts decreasing decoherence at lower temperatures—contradicting observed quantum behaviour
4. **Equilibrium assumption**: Living systems actively pump energy; thermal equilibrium describes dead tissue

When corrected, calculated coherence times extend to **10⁻⁵ to 10⁻⁴ seconds** (~10-100 microseconds)—seven orders of magnitude longer than Tegmark claimed. These remain theoretical corrections to Tegmark's model, not direct measurements of coherence in living neural tissue. A 2025 computational study (Wiest et al.) incorporating realistic biological conditions estimated 1-2 microseconds.

| Source | Coherence Time | Key Assumption |
|--------|---------------|----------------|
| Tegmark (2000) | 10⁻¹³ s | Thermal equilibrium, large separation |
| Hagan et al. (2002) | 10⁻⁵ to 10⁻⁴ s | Corrected model, smaller separation |
| 2025 simulation | 10⁻⁶ s | Realistic biological conditions |
| Fisher (2015) | ~10⁵ s | Nuclear spin mechanism |

The Fisher estimate is not a revision of Tegmark but an entirely different mechanism operating at nuclear rather than electronic scales.

## Protective Mechanisms

Four mechanisms may protect quantum coherence in neural tissue. None has been definitively confirmed in living neurons, but each has theoretical and experimental support. See [[quantum-coherence-protection|Quantum Coherence Protection in Neural Systems]] for detailed treatment of each mechanism, including illusionist challenge responses, contemplative evidence, and process philosophy perspectives.

### Hydrophobic Microtubule Interior

The interior of microtubules lacks the water molecules that typically cause rapid decoherence. Aromatic amino acids (tryptophan, phenylalanine, tyrosine) in tubulin form π-electron clouds that may support quantum superposition in this protected environment.

**2024 evidence**: Researchers confirmed ultraviolet superradiance in mega-networks of tryptophan molecules—a quantum collective phenomenon demonstrating that these biological molecules exhibit quantum coherence at room temperature. Superradiance requires multiple emitters to act as a single coherent system, not merely as isolated quantum objects.

### Metabolic Energy Pumping (Fröhlich Coherence)

Herbert Fröhlich proposed in 1968 that continuous metabolic energy input could maintain coherent oscillations in biological systems—similar to how lasers maintain coherence at room temperature despite thermal noise.

The mechanism:
- ATP hydrolysis provides continuous energy input
- Nonlinear interactions channel energy into lowest-frequency collective modes
- A Bose-Einstein-like condensate forms, maintaining coherent oscillations
- Debye layer of counterions screens thermal fluctuations

**2025 evidence**: Computer modelling found that anaesthetics specifically abolish a 613 THz quantum oscillation peak in microtubules while non-anaesthetics do not. This frequency matches Fröhlich coherence predictions—suggesting these collective oscillations exist and that anaesthetics act by disrupting them.

Three forms of Fröhlich coherence have been theorised, in order of increasing coherence requirements:

| Form | Coherence Level | Biological Feasibility |
|------|-----------------|------------------------|
| Weak | Redistribution of vibrational mode populations | Likely accessible |
| Strong | Macroscopic oscillation amplitude | Possibly accessible |
| Coherent condensate | Full quantum superposition | Unlikely accessible |

Weak and strong forms may be biologically relevant even if the strongest form is not.

### Nuclear Spin Isolation (Fisher/Posner)

Matthew Fisher's 2015 proposal offers a radically different mechanism operating at nuclear rather than electronic scales.

Phosphorus-31 nuclear spins have extremely long coherence times because:
- Nuclear spins couple weakly to the electromagnetic environment
- Phosphorus-31 is the only stable biological isotope with spin ½, simplifying magnetic interactions
- Posner molecules (Ca₉(PO₄)₆) naturally form in biological systems and further isolate the spins

Fisher calculates coherence times of **~10⁵ seconds** (over a day)—enough time for quantum effects to influence cognition, memory, and neural processing across hours rather than microseconds.

**Testable prediction**: Lithium-6 and lithium-7 have different nuclear spins. If Fisher's mechanism is real, the isotopes should have different cognitive effects. A 1986 Cornell study found that mother rats receiving lithium-6 showed stronger maternal behaviours than those receiving lithium-7 or controls. In 2025, multi-electrode array experiments on rat brain slices demonstrated that the two isotopes have "large and opposite effects on synaptic transmission"—direct evidence that lithium isotopes are pharmacologically distinct, consistent with Fisher's quantum predictions.

### Ordered Water and Cytoskeletal Gel

Water near biological surfaces exhibits ordering that reduces thermal noise. The cytoplasm isn't free-flowing liquid but a structured gel:

- Actin filaments create a structured matrix
- Water molecules near microtubule surfaces form ordered layers
- Counterions create a Debye layer screening thermal fluctuations
- Effective temperature of the microenvironment is reduced

This mechanism may work synergistically with the others—protecting electronic or nuclear coherence by reducing the noise that would otherwise destroy it.

## Experimental Evidence

### The Epothilone B Study (August 2024)

The most direct experimental test of the microtubule-consciousness hypothesis: rats given epothilone B (a microtubule-stabilising drug used in cancer treatment) took **over a minute longer** to fall unconscious under anaesthesia compared to controls.

Why this matters:
- If consciousness had nothing to do with microtubule quantum states, stabilising microtubules shouldn't affect consciousness
- The effect was specific to consciousness—microtubule stabilisation didn't affect other aspects of neural function tested
- This directly tests Orch OR's prediction that microtubule integrity affects consciousness

### Tryptophan Superradiance (2024)

Room-temperature superradiance confirmed in networks of tryptophan molecules. Superradiance is a collective quantum phenomenon requiring genuine coherence across multiple emitters. The fact that tryptophans—components of microtubule tubulin—exhibit this phenomenon in warm conditions demonstrates that the relevant molecules can sustain quantum effects biologically.

### Anaesthetic-Oscillation Correlation (2025)

Computer modelling found a specific signature: anaesthetics abolish a 613 THz oscillation peak in microtubules while non-anaesthetics do not. This frequency corresponds to Fröhlich coherence predictions. The correlation suggests:
- Collective quantum oscillations exist in microtubules
- These oscillations are specifically disrupted by anaesthetics
- The disruption correlates with loss of consciousness

### Brain Entanglement Signatures (Kerskens & Pérez, 2022-2023)

Using a novel MRI protocol designed to detect quantum entanglement, researchers observed signals in conscious human subjects that:
- Mimicked heartbeat-evoked potentials (a known conscious awareness signature)
- Disappeared when subjects fell asleep
- Correlated with short-term memory performance

The putative spin-entanglement signal was only present during conscious awareness. While the interpretation remains debated (Warren 2023 questioned the methodology), no alternative classical account has been offered for the observed pattern. If confirmed by replication, this would be direct evidence of macroscopic quantum entanglement correlating with consciousness.

### Twin Study Quantum Effects (2025)

A study of 106 monozygotic twin pairs found that entanglement of qubits in stimulus configurations explained 13.5% of variance in implicit learning accuracy, with the Q coefficient showing up to 31.6% increase in variance across twin responses. This provides novel evidence that quantum entanglement may enhance conscious processing and facilitate learning.

None of this proves that quantum effects cause consciousness, but it establishes that quantum effects exist where the theory predicts and correlate with consciousness as the theory requires.

## What Coherence Does Not Require

The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet proposes that consciousness biases quantum outcomes without injecting energy. This requires consciousness to influence the selection among quantum possibilities—but it may not require sustained coherence.

Henry Stapp's [[quantum-consciousness#quantum-zeno-effect-stapp|quantum Zeno mechanism]] offers an alternative that sidesteps the coherence problem entirely. Rapid repeated mental "observations" can maintain neural patterns without requiring coherence to survive *between* observations. The observations happen faster than decoherence acts.

Under this mechanism:
- Consciousness doesn't maintain superpositions
- Consciousness selects among possibilities at the point of collapse
- Decoherence times matter less because each observation-selection cycle is fast
- The phenomenology of mental effort matches: attention feels effortful because it requires continuous engagement

The coherence question thus divides quantum consciousness proposals:
- **Orch OR**: Requires sustained coherence (~10-100 microseconds minimum)
- **Quantum Zeno**: Requires rapid observation-selection cycles, not sustained coherence
- **Fisher/Posner**: Operates on entirely different timescales (hours, not microseconds)

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's tenets don't require proving that quantum coherence persists for any specific duration. They require:

1. **Dualism**: Consciousness is not reducible to physical processes. Neural quantum coherence is compatible with dualism but doesn't prove it.

2. **Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Consciousness influences quantum outcomes without energy injection. Coherence evidence supports this by demonstrating that quantum effects exist in neural tissue—but the selection mechanism, not the coherence, is what matters.

3. **Bidirectional Interaction**: Consciousness causally affects the physical world. The epothilone B study provides evidence for the physical→conscious direction (microtubule stability affects consciousness). The Zeno mechanism proposes the conscious→physical direction.

4. **No Many Worlds**: Outcomes are genuinely selected, not merely experienced in branching universes. This is independent of coherence duration.

5. **Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The assumption that warm biology must be classical turned out false. [[quantum-biology|Quantum biology]] has demonstrated that warm, wet systems can harness quantum effects—in photosynthesis, magnetoreception, enzyme catalysis. The simplicity heuristic pointed in the wrong direction.

The evidence doesn't prove quantum consciousness. It removes the categorical objection—"quantum effects can't happen in biology"—and replaces it with empirical questions about which quantum effects happen where. The burden has shifted.

## Further Reading

- [[quantum-coherence-protection]] — Detailed analysis of four protection mechanisms with illusionist and process philosophy responses
- [[binding-problem]] — How quantum entanglement may solve phenomenal unity
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Quantum consciousness mechanisms including Orch OR and quantum Zeno
- [[decoherence]] — Why decoherence doesn't solve the measurement problem
- [[quantum-biology]] — Biological systems exploiting quantum effects
- [[measurement-problem]] — Why physics leaves outcomes undetermined
- [[tenets]] — the Map's foundational commitments
- [[quantum-superposition-brain-consciousness-2026-01-18]] — Research notes on 2024-2025 findings
- [[neural-binding-quantum-entanglement-2026-01-19]] — Research notes on binding and entanglement

## References

- Fisher, M.P.A. (2015). Quantum cognition: The possibility of processing with nuclear spins in the brain. *Annals of Physics*, 362, 593-602.
- Fisher, M.P.A. et al. (2025). Giant and opposite lithium isotope effects on rat hippocampus synaptic activity revealed by multi-electrode array electrophysiology. *bioRxiv preprint*.
- Fröhlich, H. (1968). Long-range coherence and energy storage in biological systems. *International Journal of Quantum Chemistry*, 2(5), 641-649.
- Hagan, S., Hameroff, S., & Tuszynski, J.A. (2002). Quantum computation in brain microtubules: Decoherence and biological feasibility. *Physical Review E*, 65(6), 061901.
- Kerskens, C. M. & Pérez, D. L. (2022). Experimental indications of non-classical brain functions. *Journal of Physics Communications*, 6, 105001.
- Tegmark, M. (2000). Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. *Physical Review E*, 61(4), 4194-4206.
- Warren, W. S. (2023). Comment on "Experimental indications of non-classical brain functions". *Journal of Physics Communications*, 7, 048001.
- Wiest, O. et al. (2024). Microtubule-stabilizer epothilone B delays anesthetic-induced unconsciousness in rats. *eNeuro*, 11(8).
- Wiest, O. et al. (2025). A quantum microtubule substrate of consciousness is experimentally supported and solves the binding and epiphenomenalism problems. *Neuroscience of Consciousness*, 2025(1), niaf011.

Commit message:

feat(seo): add meta descriptions to all content files
Add description frontmatter field to 183 content files for SEO and
social sharing: 5 apex articles, 34 topics, 144 concepts. Descriptions
are 150-160 characters summarizing each article's key thesis.

obsidian/concepts/neural-quantum-coherence.md, after:

---
title: "Neural Quantum Coherence"
description: "Can quantum effects persist in warm brains? Evidence from 2024-2025 suggests yes: revised estimates extend coherence times by seven orders of magnitude."
created: 2026-01-18
modified: 2026-01-18
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-26T22:20:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[binding-problem]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[decoherence]]"
  - "[[quantum-biology]]"
  - "[[measurement-problem]]"
  - "[[quantum-coherence-protection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[quantum-superposition-brain-consciousness-2026-01-18]]"
  - "[[neural-binding-quantum-entanglement-2026-01-19]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-18
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-25T00:00:00+00:00
---

Can quantum superposition persist in neural tissue long enough to matter for consciousness? Recent experimental evidence (2024-2025) answers with qualified optimism: microtubule-stabilising drugs delay anaesthetic-induced unconsciousness, revised decoherence estimates extend coherence times by seven orders of magnitude beyond initial calculations, MRI studies detect entanglement signatures correlating with consciousness, and multiple protective mechanisms have been identified. The debate has shifted from "whether" to "how"—from categorical dismissal to empirical investigation. This matters for the [[binding-problem|binding problem]]: if quantum entanglement provides genuine physical holism—where the whole is irreducible to parts—it may explain how distributed neural processes combine into unified experience.

## The Challenge

Max Tegmark's 2000 calculation became the standard objection to [[quantum-consciousness|quantum consciousness theories]]. He estimated that quantum coherence in brain microtubules would decay in about 10⁻¹³ seconds (100 femtoseconds). Neural processes operate on millisecond timescales—a gap of ten billion times. This seemed decisive: quantum effects simply cannot persist long enough in warm, wet neural tissue.

The calculation assumed:
- Thermal equilibrium (appropriate for dead tissue)
- 24 nanometre superposition separations
- Free interaction with the aqueous environment

These assumptions are questionable for living neural systems.

## Revised Estimates

Hagan, Hameroff, and Tuszynski (2002) challenged Tegmark's model:

1. **Wrong separation distances**: Orch OR proposes smaller superposition separations than Tegmark assumed
2. **Wrong interaction type**: Tegmark used charge-charge interactions; microtubule superpositions involve dipole interactions
3. **Temperature paradox**: Tegmark's model predicts decreasing decoherence at lower temperatures—contradicting observed quantum behaviour
4. **Equilibrium assumption**: Living systems actively pump energy; thermal equilibrium describes dead tissue

When corrected, calculated coherence times extend to **10⁻⁵ to 10⁻⁴ seconds** (~10-100 microseconds)—seven orders of magnitude longer than Tegmark claimed. These remain theoretical corrections to Tegmark's model, not direct measurements of coherence in living neural tissue. A 2025 computational study (Wiest et al.) incorporating realistic biological conditions estimated 1-2 microseconds.

| Source | Coherence Time | Key Assumption |
|--------|---------------|----------------|
| Tegmark (2000) | 10⁻¹³ s | Thermal equilibrium, large separation |
| Hagan et al. (2002) | 10⁻⁵ to 10⁻⁴ s | Corrected model, smaller separation |
| 2025 simulation | 10⁻⁶ s | Realistic biological conditions |
| Fisher (2015) | ~10⁵ s | Nuclear spin mechanism |

The Fisher estimate is not a revision of Tegmark but an entirely different mechanism operating at nuclear rather than electronic scales.

## Protective Mechanisms

Four mechanisms may protect quantum coherence in neural tissue. None has been definitively confirmed in living neurons, but each has theoretical and experimental support. See [[quantum-coherence-protection|Quantum Coherence Protection in Neural Systems]] for detailed treatment of each mechanism, including illusionist challenge responses, contemplative evidence, and process philosophy perspectives.

### Hydrophobic Microtubule Interior

The interior of microtubules lacks the water molecules that typically cause rapid decoherence. Aromatic amino acids (tryptophan, phenylalanine, tyrosine) in tubulin form π-electron clouds that may support quantum superposition in this protected environment.

**2024 evidence**: Researchers confirmed ultraviolet superradiance in mega-networks of tryptophan molecules—a quantum collective phenomenon demonstrating that these biological molecules exhibit quantum coherence at room temperature. Superradiance requires multiple emitters to act as a single coherent system, not merely as isolated quantum objects.

### Metabolic Energy Pumping (Fröhlich Coherence)

Herbert Fröhlich proposed in 1968 that continuous metabolic energy input could maintain coherent oscillations in biological systems—similar to how lasers maintain coherence at room temperature despite thermal noise.

The mechanism:
- ATP hydrolysis provides continuous energy input
- Nonlinear interactions channel energy into lowest-frequency collective modes
- A Bose-Einstein-like condensate forms, maintaining coherent oscillations
- Debye layer of counterions screens thermal fluctuations

**2025 evidence**: Computer modelling found that anaesthetics specifically abolish a 613 THz quantum oscillation peak in microtubules while non-anaesthetics do not. This frequency matches Fröhlich coherence predictions—suggesting these collective oscillations exist and that anaesthetics act by disrupting them.

Three forms of Fröhlich coherence have been theorised, in order of increasing coherence requirements:

| Form | Coherence Level | Biological Feasibility |
|------|-----------------|------------------------|
| Weak | Redistribution of vibrational mode populations | Likely accessible |
| Strong | Macroscopic oscillation amplitude | Possibly accessible |
| Coherent condensate | Full quantum superposition | Unlikely accessible |

Weak and strong forms may be biologically relevant even if the strongest form is not.

### Nuclear Spin Isolation (Fisher/Posner)

Matthew Fisher's 2015 proposal offers a radically different mechanism operating at nuclear rather than electronic scales.

Phosphorus-31 nuclear spins have extremely long coherence times because:
- Nuclear spins couple weakly to the electromagnetic environment
- Phosphorus-31 is the only stable biological isotope with spin ½, simplifying magnetic interactions
- Posner molecules (Ca₉(PO₄)₆) naturally form in biological systems and further isolate the spins

Fisher calculates coherence times of **~10⁵ seconds** (over a day)—enough time for quantum effects to influence cognition, memory, and neural processing across hours rather than microseconds.

**Testable prediction**: Lithium-6 and lithium-7 have different nuclear spins. If Fisher's mechanism is real, the isotopes should have different cognitive effects. A 1986 Cornell study found that mother rats receiving lithium-6 showed stronger maternal behaviours than those receiving lithium-7 or controls. In 2025, multi-electrode array experiments on rat brain slices demonstrated that the two isotopes have "large and opposite effects on synaptic transmission"—direct evidence that lithium isotopes are pharmacologically distinct, consistent with Fisher's quantum predictions.

### Ordered Water and Cytoskeletal Gel

Water near biological surfaces exhibits ordering that reduces thermal noise. The cytoplasm isn't free-flowing liquid but a structured gel:

- Actin filaments create a structured matrix
- Water molecules near microtubule surfaces form ordered layers
- Counterions create a Debye layer screening thermal fluctuations
- Effective temperature of the microenvironment is reduced

This mechanism may work synergistically with the others—protecting electronic or nuclear coherence by reducing the noise that would otherwise destroy it.

## Experimental Evidence

### The Epothilone B Study (August 2024)

The most direct experimental test of the microtubule-consciousness hypothesis: rats given epothilone B (a microtubule-stabilising drug used in cancer treatment) took **over a minute longer** to fall unconscious under anaesthesia compared to controls.

Why this matters:
- If consciousness had nothing to do with microtubule quantum states, stabilising microtubules shouldn't affect consciousness
- The effect was specific to consciousness—microtubule stabilisation didn't affect other aspects of neural function tested
- This directly tests Orch OR's prediction that microtubule integrity affects consciousness

### Tryptophan Superradiance (2024)

Room-temperature superradiance confirmed in networks of tryptophan molecules. Superradiance is a collective quantum phenomenon requiring genuine coherence across multiple emitters. The fact that tryptophans—components of microtubule tubulin—exhibit this phenomenon in warm conditions demonstrates that the relevant molecules can sustain quantum effects biologically.

### Anaesthetic-Oscillation Correlation (2025)

Computer modelling found a specific signature: anaesthetics abolish a 613 THz oscillation peak in microtubules while non-anaesthetics do not. This frequency corresponds to Fröhlich coherence predictions. The correlation suggests:
- Collective quantum oscillations exist in microtubules
- These oscillations are specifically disrupted by anaesthetics
- The disruption correlates with loss of consciousness

### Brain Entanglement Signatures (Kerskens & Pérez, 2022-2023)

Using a novel MRI protocol designed to detect quantum entanglement, researchers observed signals in conscious human subjects that:
- Mimicked heartbeat-evoked potentials (a known conscious awareness signature)
- Disappeared when subjects fell asleep
- Correlated with short-term memory performance

The putative spin-entanglement signal was only present during conscious awareness. While the interpretation remains debated (Warren 2023 questioned the methodology), no alternative classical account has been offered for the observed pattern. If confirmed by replication, this would be direct evidence of macroscopic quantum entanglement correlating with consciousness.

### Twin Study Quantum Effects (2025)

A study of 106 monozygotic twin pairs found that entanglement of qubits in stimulus configurations explained 13.5% of variance in implicit learning accuracy, with the Q coefficient showing up to 31.6% increase in variance across twin responses. This provides novel evidence that quantum entanglement may enhance conscious processing and facilitate learning.

None of this proves that quantum effects cause consciousness, but it establishes that quantum effects exist where the theory predicts and correlate with consciousness as the theory requires.

## What Coherence Does Not Require

The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet proposes that consciousness biases quantum outcomes without injecting energy. This requires consciousness to influence the selection among quantum possibilities—but it may not require sustained coherence.

Henry Stapp's [[quantum-consciousness#quantum-zeno-effect-stapp|quantum Zeno mechanism]] offers an alternative that sidesteps the coherence problem entirely. Rapid repeated mental "observations" can maintain neural patterns without requiring coherence to survive *between* observations. The observations happen faster than decoherence acts.

Under this mechanism:
- Consciousness doesn't maintain superpositions
- Consciousness selects among possibilities at the point of collapse
- Decoherence times matter less because each observation-selection cycle is fast
- The phenomenology of mental effort matches: attention feels effortful because it requires continuous engagement

The coherence question thus divides quantum consciousness proposals:
- **Orch OR**: Requires sustained coherence (~10-100 microseconds minimum)
- **Quantum Zeno**: Requires rapid observation-selection cycles, not sustained coherence
- **Fisher/Posner**: Operates on entirely different timescales (hours, not microseconds)

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's tenets don't require proving that quantum coherence persists for any specific duration. They require:

1. **Dualism**: Consciousness is not reducible to physical processes. Neural quantum coherence is compatible with dualism but doesn't prove it.

2. **Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Consciousness influences quantum outcomes without energy injection. Coherence evidence supports this by demonstrating that quantum effects exist in neural tissue—but the selection mechanism, not the coherence, is what matters.

3. **Bidirectional Interaction**: Consciousness causally affects the physical world. The epothilone B study provides evidence for the physical→conscious direction (microtubule stability affects consciousness). The Zeno mechanism proposes the conscious→physical direction.

4. **No Many Worlds**: Outcomes are genuinely selected, not merely experienced in branching universes. This is independent of coherence duration.

5. **Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The assumption that warm biology must be classical turned out false. [[quantum-biology|Quantum biology]] has demonstrated that warm, wet systems can harness quantum effects—in photosynthesis, magnetoreception, enzyme catalysis. The simplicity heuristic pointed in the wrong direction.

The evidence doesn't prove quantum consciousness. It removes the categorical objection—"quantum effects can't happen in biology"—and replaces it with empirical questions about which quantum effects happen where. The burden has shifted.

## Further Reading

- [[quantum-coherence-protection]] — Detailed analysis of four protection mechanisms with illusionist and process philosophy responses
- [[binding-problem]] — How quantum entanglement may solve phenomenal unity
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Quantum consciousness mechanisms including Orch OR and quantum Zeno
- [[decoherence]] — Why decoherence doesn't solve the measurement problem
- [[quantum-biology]] — Biological systems exploiting quantum effects
- [[measurement-problem]] — Why physics leaves outcomes undetermined
- [[tenets]] — the Map's foundational commitments
- [[quantum-superposition-brain-consciousness-2026-01-18]] — Research notes on 2024-2025 findings
- [[neural-binding-quantum-entanglement-2026-01-19]] — Research notes on binding and entanglement

## References

- Fisher, M.P.A. (2015). Quantum cognition: The possibility of processing with nuclear spins in the brain. *Annals of Physics*, 362, 593-602.
- Fisher, M.P.A. et al. (2025). Giant and opposite lithium isotope effects on rat hippocampus synaptic activity revealed by multi-electrode array electrophysiology. *bioRxiv preprint*.
- Fröhlich, H. (1968). Long-range coherence and energy storage in biological systems. *International Journal of Quantum Chemistry*, 2(5), 641-649.
- Hagan, S., Hameroff, S., & Tuszynski, J.A. (2002). Quantum computation in brain microtubules: Decoherence and biological feasibility. *Physical Review E*, 65(6), 061901.
- Kerskens, C. M. & Pérez, D. L. (2022). Experimental indications of non-classical brain functions. *Journal of Physics Communications*, 6, 105001.
- Tegmark, M. (2000). Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. *Physical Review E*, 61(4), 4194-4206.
- Warren, W. S. (2023). Comment on "Experimental indications of non-classical brain functions". *Journal of Physics Communications*, 7, 048001.
- Wiest, O. et al. (2024). Microtubule-stabilizer epothilone B delays anesthetic-induced unconsciousness in rats. *eNeuro*, 11(8).
- Wiest, O. et al. (2025). A quantum microtubule substrate of consciousness is experimentally supported and solves the binding and epiphenomenalism problems. *Neuroscience of Consciousness*, 2025(1), niaf011.
