obsidian/concepts/objectivity-and-consciousness.md, before:

---
title: "Objectivity and Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-23
modified: 2026-01-23
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-23T01:03:21+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[neurophenomenology]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[intersubjectivity]]"
  - "[[heterophenomenology]]"
  - "[[problem-of-other-minds]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[dualism]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-23
last_curated:
---

Consciousness presents a unique challenge to the scientific ideal of objectivity. Science aims for the "view from nowhere"—detached, perspective-free knowledge independent of any particular observer. But consciousness is irreducibly subjective: there's something it's like to be conscious that is only accessible from a first-person viewpoint. This creates a paradox: the objective methods that work elsewhere in science may fail precisely where subjectivity is the subject matter.

The question is whether this resistance reflects methodological limitations (soluble by better techniques) or metaphysical necessity (consciousness genuinely escapes objective description). Thomas Nagel's work established the problem: objective understanding requires abstracting away from perspective, but consciousness *is* perspective. A complete physical description of vision—wavelengths, neural firing patterns, V1 activation—leaves out what red *looks like*. This isn't ignorance to be remedied; it's the explanatory gap between third-person physical facts and first-person phenomenal facts.

## The View From Nowhere

Nagel's *The View From Nowhere* (1986) captured the scientific aspiration: knowledge from no particular viewpoint, description that anyone (or anything) could verify. Physics succeeds through this method—electrons behave the same whether observed by humans, instruments, or hypothetical aliens. Objectivity in this sense means perspective-independence.

But consciousness has essential subjective character. "What it is like to be a bat" cannot be understood by learning bat neurology or echolocation physics. We might know *that* bats experience, and predict their behavior, but the phenomenal character—what their sonar *feels like*—remains inaccessible from the outside. No amount of third-person data closes this gap.

Nagel's insight: there is no genuine view from nowhere, only the aspiration toward it. For physical systems (rocks, planets, molecules), this aspiration succeeds—we can describe them without reference to any observer's experience. For consciousness itself, the aspiration becomes blindness. Eliminating the observer eliminates the subject matter.

## First-Person, Second-Person, Third-Person

Consciousness studies involves three methodological perspectives, each capturing something important:

**First-person** (phenomenological introspection): Direct access to one's own experience. You know immediately what red looks like, what pain feels like, what it's like to decide. This is the *primary data*—phenomenal consciousness in its original form. Without first-person access, there would be no "hard problem" to explain.

**Third-person** (neuroscience, behaviorism): Objective observation of brain states, behavior, neural correlates. This perspective provides mechanistic understanding—which neurons fire when seeing red, how anesthesia disrupts consciousness, what distinguishes waking from sleep. Heterophenomenology (Dennett 1991) treats first-person reports as neutral behavioral data without assuming privileged access.

**Second-person** (intersubjectivity, shared intentionality): Recognition of other minds through joint attention and mutual awareness. Developmental psychology shows shared intentionality emerges at 9-12 months—long before sophisticated theory of mind. We don't infer other minds from behavior; we perceive mental states directly in expressions, gestures, joint gaze. Objectivity on this view is intersubjective agreement, not elimination of the observer.

None alone suffices. First-person alone leads to solipsism—you know your own consciousness but cannot confirm others'. Third-person alone misses phenomenal character—neural correlates without the experience they correlate with. Second-person acknowledges intersubjectivity but depends on prior first-person access (you must have experience to recognize it in others).

## The Objectivity Paradox

Consciousness uniquely resists the objective methods that work elsewhere:

1. **Physics abstracts from observers**: Replace "the rock feels heavy to me" with "the rock has mass 5kg." Objectivity achieved by removing subjective perspective.

2. **Consciousness is the observer**: Replace "I feel pain" with... what? "Pain-related neural patterns fire"? That describes correlates, not the experience. "The subject reports pain"? That's heterophenomenology—behavior, not phenomenology.

3. **The paradox**: Objective methods succeed by eliminating subjective viewpoint. Consciousness *is* subjective viewpoint. Applying objective methods to consciousness eliminates the subject matter.

This isn't methodological failure fixable with better instruments. It's conceptual: phenomenal properties are *defined* by how they appear from the first-person perspective. "What red looks like" has no third-person translation. You can describe wavelengths (620-750nm), V4 activation patterns, color discrimination abilities—but never the quale itself.

## Methodological Responses

Three major approaches attempt to bridge the gap:

### Heterophenomenology (Dennett)

Treat first-person reports as objective behavioral data. When someone says "I see red," that's a public utterance to be explained—why does the subject *say* they experience red? Heterophenomenology studies the content of verbal reports without assuming direct phenomenal access.

**Limitation**: This approach is methodologically neutral—perhaps too neutral. It doesn't rely substantially on introspective beliefs, which critics argue means it's studying reports *about* consciousness rather than consciousness itself. The phenomenal character that generates the reports remains unexamined.

### Neurophenomenology (Varela)

Integrate first-person phenomenology and third-person neuroscience through "mutual constraints." Neither perspective has epistemic priority; they constrain each other. Trained introspective reports (from meditation practitioners, for instance) provide disciplined first-person data that guides neural investigation. Neural findings in turn refine phenomenological descriptions.

Recent work (2025) develops "deep computational neurophenomenology" using Bayesian mechanics, demonstrating potential for principled integration across phenomenological, computational, and physiological vocabularies. This approach acknowledges irreducibility of first-person perspective while seeking systematic connection to objective measures.

**Strength**: Respects both subjective experience (as data) and objective neuroscience (as mechanism). Avoids reducing one to the other.

**Question**: Does "mutual constraints" solve the hard problem or simply coordinate phenomenological and neural descriptions? The explanatory gap may persist even with perfect correlation.

### Second-Person Phenomenology (Intersubjectivity)

Start with shared intentionality rather than isolated consciousness. The Cartesian starting point (private experience, then infer other minds) is artificial. Developmentally and conceptually, recognition of other minds comes *before* sophisticated introspection. We perceive others' mental states directly in joint attention, emotional contagion, collaborative activity.

Objectivity emerges as intersubjective agreement among conscious observers, not perspective-free description. Scientific knowledge is validated through shared observation, replicability across different observers. This is "objectivity" in practice—not view from nowhere, but view from everywhere conscious.

**Implication**: The problem of other minds is dissolved by recognizing that second-person experience (mutual recognition) is primary. We don't infer minds; we directly encounter them in social interaction.

## Quantum Consciousness and the Observer

Even physics may require observers. The quantum measurement problem—why observation produces definite outcomes from superposed states—suggests that "objective reality" independent of consciousness may be incoherent. Some quantum theories (Stapp, von Neumann-Wigner) propose consciousness plays a role in collapse.

If consciousness affects quantum outcomes (the Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet), then the "view from nowhere" ideal fails even in physics. There is no observer-independent description of quantum systems—the observer is part of the system. Objectivity becomes agreement among conscious observers, not elimination of observation.

This doesn't prove idealism (that reality is purely mental). The Map accepts a mind-independent physical base layer. But it suggests the interface between consciousness and physics may be where objectivity reaches its limit. At quantum measurement, perspective matters.

## Why Not Idealism?

Berkeley's subjective idealism denies mind-independent reality entirely: "to be is to be perceived" (*esse est percipi*). Objectivity is regularity in perception, not material substance. All reality is ideas in minds (ultimately God's mind in Berkeley's theology).

The Map rejects this path while accepting that consciousness resists objective reduction. Why?

**Pragmatic**: Physical science works. We predict planetary motion, design vaccines, build computers—all assuming mind-independent physical reality. These successes suggest something is *there* to be described, even if our descriptions are always from within consciousness.

**Evolutionary**: If reality were purely mental, the evolutionary story makes no sense. Consciousness evolved in organisms because those organisms needed to navigate a physical world. Biological evolution presupposes physical processes operating before consciousness emerged.

**Modest realism**: Accept mind-independent physical reality while denying that consciousness is reducible to physical facts. This is dualism, not idealism. The physical world exists objectively; phenomenal properties do not. Objectivity works for matter, fails for mind.

## Relation to Site Perspective

This analysis directly supports the Map's foundational tenets:

**Dualism**: Consciousness resists objective description not due to methodological limitations but because phenomenal properties are irreducibly subjective. The view from nowhere works for physical systems precisely because they lack first-person character. Consciousness, as perspective itself, cannot be captured in perspective-free terms. The explanatory gap between objective physical facts and subjective phenomenal facts reflects an ontological gap.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The methodological preference for objective understanding (third-person description) may blind us to irreducible subjectivity. Physicalism appears simpler because it restricts itself to what objective methods can capture. But this apparent simplicity reflects cognitive/methodological boundaries, not metaphysical truth. When objectivity is the criterion, only the objective registers as real.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: If consciousness is causally efficacious (evidenced by our ability to report on phenomenal states), then the view from nowhere must accommodate first-person influence on physical outcomes. Purely objective description omits the causal role of subjective decision-making. Neurophenomenology's mutual constraints approach recognizes this: first-person phenomenology and third-person neuroscience must constrain each other because consciousness participates in physical causation.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Quantum mechanics may provide the interface where subjective perspective meets objective measurement. If consciousness biases quantum outcomes, then observer-independent description fails at the most fundamental physical level. Objectivity becomes intersubjective agreement among conscious measurers, not view from nowhere.

The limits of objectivity are not defects to overcome but features of reality itself. Some truths are accessible only from within consciousness. This doesn't undermine science—it clarifies its scope. Physics describes the objective structure of matter; phenomenology describes the subjective character of experience. Both are needed. Neither reduces to the other.

## Further Reading

- [[dualism]] - The irreducibility of consciousness to physical processes
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] - Why objective description leaves out phenomenal character
- [[phenomenal-consciousness]] - What it's like to be conscious
- [[heterophenomenology]] - Dennett's third-person methodology
- [[neurophenomenology]] - Varela's mutual constraints approach
- [[problem-of-other-minds]] - How we know other conscious beings exist
- [[intersubjectivity]] - Second-person perspective and shared intentionality
- [[witness-consciousness]] - The observer role in meditation and phenomenology
- [[phenomenology]] - First-person investigation of experience

## References

Dennett, D. C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.

Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *The Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.

Nagel, T. (1986). *The View From Nowhere*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Tomasello, M. (2007). "Shared intentionality." *Developmental Science*, 12(1), 121-125.

Varela, F. J. (1996). "Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the hard problem." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 3(4), 330-349.

Wolf, W., & Tomasello, M. (2025). "A Shared Intentionality Account of Uniquely Human Social Bonding." *Perspectives on Psychological Science*. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/17456916231201795

Recent (2025): "Deep computational neurophenomenology: a methodological framework for investigating the how of experience." *Neuroscience of Consciousness*. https://academic.oup.com/nc/article/2025/1/niaf016/8222537

Recent (2025): "Consciousness science: where are we, where are we going, and what if we get there?" *Frontiers in Science*. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/science/articles/10.3389/fsci.2025.1546279/full

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review objectivity-and-consciousness.md with intersubjectivity
Task: Cross-review objectivity-and-consciousness.md considering intersubjectivity article
Session: 696

obsidian/concepts/objectivity-and-consciousness.md, after:

---
title: "Objectivity and Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-23
modified: 2026-01-23
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-23T16:40:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[neurophenomenology]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[intersubjectivity]]"
  - "[[heterophenomenology]]"
  - "[[problem-of-other-minds]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[dualism]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-23
last_curated:
---

Consciousness presents a unique challenge to the scientific ideal of objectivity. Science aims for the "view from nowhere"—detached, perspective-free knowledge independent of any particular observer. But consciousness is irreducibly subjective: there's something it's like to be conscious that is only accessible from a first-person viewpoint. This creates a paradox: the objective methods that work elsewhere in science may fail precisely where subjectivity is the subject matter.

The question is whether this resistance reflects methodological limitations (soluble by better techniques) or metaphysical necessity (consciousness genuinely escapes objective description). Thomas Nagel's work established the problem: objective understanding requires abstracting away from perspective, but consciousness *is* perspective. A complete physical description of vision—wavelengths, neural firing patterns, V1 activation—leaves out what red *looks like*. This isn't ignorance to be remedied; it's the explanatory gap between third-person physical facts and first-person phenomenal facts.

## The View From Nowhere

Nagel's *The View From Nowhere* (1986) captured the scientific aspiration: knowledge from no particular viewpoint, description that anyone (or anything) could verify. Physics succeeds through this method—electrons behave the same whether observed by humans, instruments, or hypothetical aliens. Objectivity in this sense means perspective-independence.

But consciousness has essential subjective character. "What it is like to be a bat" cannot be understood by learning bat neurology or echolocation physics. We might know *that* bats experience, and predict their behavior, but the phenomenal character—what their sonar *feels like*—remains inaccessible from the outside. No amount of third-person data closes this gap.

Nagel's insight: there is no genuine view from nowhere, only the aspiration toward it. For physical systems (rocks, planets, molecules), this aspiration succeeds—we can describe them without reference to any observer's experience. For consciousness itself, the aspiration becomes blindness. Eliminating the observer eliminates the subject matter.

## Objectivity Versus Intersubjectivity

[[Intersubjectivity]] offers an alternative to the view from nowhere. Where objectivity eliminates perspective to achieve perspective-free description, intersubjectivity retains perspective while discovering convergence across different viewpoints.

When you describe your experience of pain and I recognize the description as matching my own, we achieve intersubjective agreement. Neither of us abandoned first-person access; we found common ground *within* subjectivity. The distinction matters because intersubjectivity might succeed where objectivity fails. Phenomenal consciousness resists the view from nowhere—but multiple conscious perspectives can converge on its features.

Husserl argued that objectivity is actually *grounded* in intersubjectivity. We don't start with an objective world and wonder how subjects fit in. We start with multiple subjects and constitute objectivity through their convergent perspectives. The "objective world"—the world that exists independently of any particular viewpoint—emerges when different subjects agree on the same structures. Scientific objectivity, on this analysis, is a particularly disciplined form of intersubjective agreement.

This reframing shifts the problem. The question becomes: can intersubjective methods access phenomenal consciousness even though objective methods cannot? If trained introspectors across different traditions converge on similar phenomenological distinctions—if contemplative practitioners recognize each other's experiential landmarks—this provides a form of validation unavailable from the third-person view.

## First-Person, Second-Person, Third-Person

Consciousness studies involves three methodological perspectives, each capturing something important:

**First-person** (phenomenological introspection): Direct access to one's own experience. You know immediately what red looks like, what pain feels like, what it's like to decide. This is the *primary data*—phenomenal consciousness in its original form. Without first-person access, there would be no "hard problem" to explain.

**Third-person** (neuroscience, behaviorism): Objective observation of brain states, behavior, neural correlates. This perspective provides mechanistic understanding—which neurons fire when seeing red, how anesthesia disrupts consciousness, what distinguishes waking from sleep. Heterophenomenology (Dennett 1991) treats first-person reports as neutral behavioral data without assuming privileged access.

**Second-person** (intersubjectivity, shared intentionality): Recognition of other minds through joint attention and mutual awareness. Developmental psychology shows shared intentionality emerges at 9-12 months—long before sophisticated theory of mind. We don't infer other minds from behavior; we perceive mental states directly in expressions, gestures, joint gaze. Objectivity on this view is intersubjective agreement, not elimination of the observer.

None alone suffices. First-person alone leads to solipsism—you know your own consciousness but cannot confirm others'. Third-person alone misses phenomenal character—neural correlates without the experience they correlate with. Second-person acknowledges intersubjectivity but depends on prior first-person access (you must have experience to recognize it in others).

## The Objectivity Paradox

Consciousness uniquely resists the objective methods that work elsewhere:

1. **Physics abstracts from observers**: Replace "the rock feels heavy to me" with "the rock has mass 5kg." Objectivity achieved by removing subjective perspective.

2. **Consciousness is the observer**: Replace "I feel pain" with... what? "Pain-related neural patterns fire"? That describes correlates, not the experience. "The subject reports pain"? That's heterophenomenology—behavior, not phenomenology.

3. **The paradox**: Objective methods succeed by eliminating subjective viewpoint. Consciousness *is* subjective viewpoint. Applying objective methods to consciousness eliminates the subject matter.

This isn't methodological failure fixable with better instruments. It's conceptual: phenomenal properties are *defined* by how they appear from the first-person perspective. "What red looks like" has no third-person translation. You can describe wavelengths (620-750nm), V4 activation patterns, color discrimination abilities—but never the quale itself.

## Methodological Responses

Three major approaches attempt to bridge the gap:

### Heterophenomenology (Dennett)

Treat first-person reports as objective behavioral data. When someone says "I see red," that's a public utterance to be explained—why does the subject *say* they experience red? Heterophenomenology studies the content of verbal reports without assuming direct phenomenal access.

**Limitation**: This approach is methodologically neutral—perhaps too neutral. It doesn't rely substantially on introspective beliefs, which critics argue means it's studying reports *about* consciousness rather than consciousness itself. The phenomenal character that generates the reports remains unexamined.

### Neurophenomenology (Varela)

Integrate first-person phenomenology and third-person neuroscience through "mutual constraints." Neither perspective has epistemic priority; they constrain each other. Trained introspective reports (from meditation practitioners, for instance) provide disciplined first-person data that guides neural investigation. Neural findings in turn refine phenomenological descriptions.

Recent work (2025) develops "deep computational neurophenomenology" using Bayesian mechanics, demonstrating potential for principled integration across phenomenological, computational, and physiological vocabularies. This approach acknowledges irreducibility of first-person perspective while seeking systematic connection to objective measures.

**Strength**: Respects both subjective experience (as data) and objective neuroscience (as mechanism). Avoids reducing one to the other.

**Question**: Does "mutual constraints" solve the hard problem or simply coordinate phenomenological and neural descriptions? The explanatory gap may persist even with perfect correlation.

### Second-Person Phenomenology (Intersubjectivity)

Start with shared intentionality rather than isolated consciousness. The Cartesian starting point (private experience, then infer other minds) is artificial. Developmentally and conceptually, recognition of other minds comes *before* sophisticated introspection. We perceive others' mental states directly in joint attention, emotional contagion, collaborative activity.

Objectivity emerges as intersubjective agreement among conscious observers, not perspective-free description. Scientific knowledge is validated through shared observation, replicability across different observers. This is "objectivity" in practice—not view from nowhere, but view from everywhere conscious.

**Implication**: The problem of other minds is dissolved by recognizing that second-person experience (mutual recognition) is primary. We don't infer minds; we directly encounter them in social interaction.

## Quantum Consciousness and the Observer

Even physics may require observers. The quantum measurement problem—why observation produces definite outcomes from superposed states—suggests that "objective reality" independent of consciousness may be incoherent. Some quantum theories (Stapp, von Neumann-Wigner) propose consciousness plays a role in collapse.

If consciousness affects quantum outcomes (the Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet), then the "view from nowhere" ideal fails even in physics. There is no observer-independent description of quantum systems—the observer is part of the system. Objectivity becomes agreement among conscious observers, not elimination of observation.

This doesn't prove idealism (that reality is purely mental). The Map accepts a mind-independent physical base layer. But it suggests the interface between consciousness and physics may be where objectivity reaches its limit. At quantum measurement, perspective matters.

## Why Not Idealism?

Berkeley's subjective idealism denies mind-independent reality entirely: "to be is to be perceived" (*esse est percipi*). Objectivity is regularity in perception, not material substance. All reality is ideas in minds (ultimately God's mind in Berkeley's theology).

The Map rejects this path while accepting that consciousness resists objective reduction. Why?

**Pragmatic**: Physical science works. We predict planetary motion, design vaccines, build computers—all assuming mind-independent physical reality. These successes suggest something is *there* to be described, even if our descriptions are always from within consciousness.

**Evolutionary**: If reality were purely mental, the evolutionary story makes no sense. Consciousness evolved in organisms because those organisms needed to navigate a physical world. Biological evolution presupposes physical processes operating before consciousness emerged.

**Modest realism**: Accept mind-independent physical reality while denying that consciousness is reducible to physical facts. This is dualism, not idealism. The physical world exists objectively; phenomenal properties do not. Objectivity works for matter, fails for mind.

## Relation to Site Perspective

This analysis directly supports the Map's foundational tenets:

**Dualism**: Consciousness resists objective description not due to methodological limitations but because phenomenal properties are irreducibly subjective. The view from nowhere works for physical systems precisely because they lack first-person character. Consciousness, as perspective itself, cannot be captured in perspective-free terms. The explanatory gap between objective physical facts and subjective phenomenal facts reflects an ontological gap.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The methodological preference for objective understanding (third-person description) may blind us to irreducible subjectivity. Physicalism appears simpler because it restricts itself to what objective methods can capture. But this apparent simplicity reflects cognitive/methodological boundaries, not metaphysical truth. When objectivity is the criterion, only the objective registers as real.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: If consciousness is causally efficacious (evidenced by our ability to report on phenomenal states), then the view from nowhere must accommodate first-person influence on physical outcomes. Purely objective description omits the causal role of subjective decision-making. Neurophenomenology's mutual constraints approach recognizes this: first-person phenomenology and third-person neuroscience must constrain each other because consciousness participates in physical causation.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Quantum mechanics may provide the interface where subjective perspective meets objective measurement. If consciousness biases quantum outcomes, then observer-independent description fails at the most fundamental physical level. Objectivity becomes intersubjective agreement among conscious measurers, not view from nowhere.

The limits of objectivity are not defects to overcome but features of reality itself. Some truths are accessible only from within consciousness. This doesn't undermine science—it clarifies its scope. Physics describes the objective structure of matter; phenomenology describes the subjective character of experience. Both are needed. Neither reduces to the other.

## Further Reading

- [[intersubjectivity]] — How objectivity emerges from convergence across multiple conscious perspectives
- [[dualism]] - The irreducibility of consciousness to physical processes
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] - Why objective description leaves out phenomenal character
- [[phenomenal-consciousness]] - What it's like to be conscious
- [[heterophenomenology]] - Dennett's third-person methodology
- [[neurophenomenology]] - Varela's mutual constraints approach
- [[problem-of-other-minds]] - How we know other conscious beings exist
- [[witness-consciousness]] - The observer role in meditation and phenomenology
- [[phenomenology]] - First-person investigation of experience

## References

Dennett, D. C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Boston: Little, Brown and Co.

Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *The Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.

Nagel, T. (1986). *The View From Nowhere*. New York: Oxford University Press.

Tomasello, M. (2007). "Shared intentionality." *Developmental Science*, 12(1), 121-125.

Varela, F. J. (1996). "Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the hard problem." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 3(4), 330-349.

Wolf, W., & Tomasello, M. (2025). "A Shared Intentionality Account of Uniquely Human Social Bonding." *Perspectives on Psychological Science*. https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/17456916231201795

Recent (2025): "Deep computational neurophenomenology: a methodological framework for investigating the how of experience." *Neuroscience of Consciousness*. https://academic.oup.com/nc/article/2025/1/niaf016/8222537

Recent (2025): "Consciousness science: where are we, where are we going, and what if we get there?" *Frontiers in Science*. https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/science/articles/10.3389/fsci.2025.1546279/full
