obsidian/concepts/phenomenal-consciousness.md, before:

---
title: "Phenomenal Consciousness"
description: "What it is like to be in a mental state—the subjective quality of experience. The hard problem's core and the primary reason for rejecting materialism."
created: 2026-01-22
modified: 2026-01-25
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-03T06:07:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-01-25T11:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[access-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-concepts-strategy]]"
  - "[[inverted-qualia]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[argument-from-reason]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[stapp-quantum-mind]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[emotional-consciousness]]"
  - "[[cognitive-phenomenology]]"
  - "[[objectivity-and-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-22
last_curated: null
---

Phenomenal consciousness (P-consciousness) is what it is *like* to be in a mental state—the subjective, experiential quality that accompanies perception, thought, emotion, and sensation. When you see red, taste coffee, or feel pain, there is something it is like to have that experience. That "something it is like" is phenomenal consciousness.

P-consciousness is the hard problem's core. Physical theories can explain information processing, behavioral control, and cognitive function—what Ned Block calls [[access-consciousness]] (A-consciousness). What they cannot explain is why processing feels like anything at all. The [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]] between neural activity and subjective experience defines the challenge consciousness poses to [[materialism]].

## Definition and Core Features {#definition}

Ned Block introduced "phenomenal consciousness" in 1995 to isolate the experiential aspect from functional aspects: P-consciousness is "experience; what makes a mental state phenomenally conscious is that there is something it is like to be in that state." This echoes Thomas Nagel's 1974 formulation: consciousness requires something it is like *for the organism*.

The defining mark is subjective character—the redness of seeing red, the sharpness of pain, the weighted feeling of sadness, the phenomenology of understanding (see [[cognitive-phenomenology]]). Each involves distinctive qualitative character that constitutes P-consciousness.

[[Qualia]] are individual phenomenal properties—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain. P-consciousness is the broader category encompassing qualia plus the overall character of conscious states, experiential unity, and the subjective perspective itself. Qualia's features—intrinsic, private, ineffable, directly apprehensible—make P-consciousness resistant to third-person explanation.

## The Access/Phenomenal Distinction {#distinction}

Block's 1995 paper argued philosophers conflate two distinct concepts:

**[[Access-consciousness|Access consciousness]]**: Information poised for global control—available for reasoning, verbal report, and action guidance. A-consciousness is defined functionally by what information *does*.

**Phenomenal consciousness**: The experiential quality of mental states—what they *feel like*. P-consciousness is defined by subjective character, not functional role.

The distinction reveals what physicalist theories can and cannot explain. Physicalism succeeds at access: [[Global-workspace-theory|Global Workspace Theory]] and related neural models can explain how information becomes globally available. But even complete understanding of access mechanisms leaves the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] untouched: why does globally broadcast information feel like anything?

Block argues the two can dissociate. [[Blindsight]] patients may have degraded access without phenomenology. Sperling's iconic memory experiments suggest phenomenology exceeding access capacity—though this interpretation remains contested. If dissociations are real, functional explanations explain access but not phenomenology.

## The Hard Problem {#hard-problem}

David Chalmers's "hard problem" centers on P-consciousness: why is information processing accompanied by experience? Even solving all "easy problems" (explaining cognitive functions) leaves this unanswered.

The hard problem has two aspects: the *existence question* (why does processing give rise to phenomenology at all, rather than being "dark inside" like a [[philosophical-zombies|philosophical zombie]]?) and the *character question* (why does this brain state feel like *this* rather than *that*?). We can identify [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness|neural correlates]] of experience but cannot explain why those correlations hold.

### Zombies and the Conceivability Argument

The [[philosophical-zombies|zombie argument]] exploits P-consciousness's resistance to functional explanation. If a being physically identical to you but lacking phenomenal consciousness is conceivable, then P-consciousness isn't entailed by physical facts. Chalmers argues conceivability indicates metaphysical possibility, so materialism is false. Critics challenge whether zombies are genuinely conceivable or whether conceivability implies possibility, but the argument's force comes from phenomenology's apparent logical independence from function.

### The Knowledge Argument

Frank Jackson's [[knowledge-argument|Mary's Room]] similarly targets P-consciousness. Mary knows all physical facts about color vision but has never seen color. When she sees red, she learns something new—what it's like. If phenomenal facts exceed physical facts, P-consciousness isn't reducible to the physical.

## Inverted Qualia and Phenomenal Character {#inversion}

[[Inverted-qualia|Inverted qualia]] scenarios reveal P-consciousness's independence from function. If two people have systematically inverted color experiences yet identical behavior—both calling tomatoes "red" and stopping at red lights—then phenomenal facts vary while functional facts remain constant. This suggests phenomenal properties aren't identical to functional properties. Critics dispute whether such inversion is genuinely possible, but the conceivability of inversion reflects P-consciousness's apparent logical independence from external relations.

## The Phenomenal Concept Strategy {#pcs}

The [[phenomenal-concepts-strategy|phenomenal concept strategy]] (PCS) is the most sophisticated physicalist response. Rather than denying the [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]], PCS locates it in our *concepts* rather than reality. Phenomenal concepts—deployed when introspecting experience—have special features making them *seem* conceptually independent from physical concepts, creating the *appearance* of an ontological gap even if consciousness is physical.

The analogy: "heat" and "molecular motion" seem independent before thermodynamics, but the gap was epistemic, not ontological. PCS claims phenomenal and physical concepts similarly pick out the same properties via different modes of presentation. Major versions include Loar's direct recognitional account, Papineau's quotational account, and Balog's constitutional account.

### Chalmers's Master Argument

Chalmers presents a dilemma. Let C be the special features of phenomenal concepts. Either physical duplicates lacking C are conceivable—in which case C itself isn't physically explicable and PCS relocates the hard problem—or they aren't conceivable, meaning [[philosophical-zombies|zombies]] would have C too and the strategy can't explain why we find P-consciousness puzzling. Either way, PCS fails. The explanatory gap's persistence despite sophisticated conceptual responses suggests something about P-consciousness itself resists physical explanation.

## Illusionism: Denying P-Consciousness {#illusionism}

[[Illusionism]] (Dennett, Frankish) holds there is no phenomenal consciousness—we merely *represent* ourselves as having irreducible experiential qualities. The "illusion problem" (why we represent ourselves as having qualia) replaces the hard problem.

The primary objection: even illusions require phenomenology. If it *seems* you have qualia, something is going on—the seeming itself. The illusionist must say pain involves no "painfulness" beyond functional representation of damage. But this denies what is most immediately known: that pain *hurts* as an experiential quality.

Illusionism captures something: introspection is fallible, and the explanatory gap might partly reflect how we think about experience. But if P-consciousness is what we know most directly—the one thing we cannot coherently doubt—theories denying it are less plausible than theories accepting it. The [[argument-from-reason]] deepens this: representing something as having phenomenal properties requires grasping *what* is being represented, which itself involves phenomenal consciousness.

## The Mysterian Caveat {#mysterianism}

[[Mysterianism]] suggests we may be unable to understand how P-consciousness relates to physical processes—not because consciousness is supernatural, but because our cognitive architecture may be closed to the relevant property. Colin McGinn argues that introspection accesses consciousness while perception accesses brains, but neither reveals their connection. The solution might exist yet remain beyond our conceptual reach.

This connects to [[conceptual-acquisition-limits]]: if the concepts needed to understand consciousness-brain relations aren't among our native cognitive endowment, no investigation will produce them. The mysterian caveat is compatible with both dualism and physicalism—it concerns epistemic limits, not ontology. The Map takes this seriously under [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]: our sense of explanatory "simplicity" may reflect cognitive closure rather than reality.

## Relation to Site Perspective

P-consciousness is central to The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]]. The irreducibility of phenomenal properties—the fact that no functional or structural description captures what it is like to see red or feel pain—is the primary reason for rejecting [[materialism]].

### Supporting Dualism

The arguments converge: the [[explanatory-gap]] shows physical descriptions don't entail phenomenal ones; [[philosophical-zombies|zombie conceivability]] reveals P-consciousness's logical independence from physical facts; the [[knowledge-argument]] shows phenomenal facts exceed physical facts; [[inverted-qualia]] scenarios show phenomenal character can vary while function remains constant. Together, these suggest P-consciousness is irreducible. If irreducible, consciousness is not purely physical. Dualism follows.

### Bidirectional Interaction and Causal Efficacy

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that P-consciousness is causally efficacious. That we report on phenomenal properties suggests information about consciousness flows into the physical domain. [[Epiphenomenalism]] faces self-stultification: if phenomenal properties don't affect behavior, beliefs about them are causally disconnected from the properties themselves, undermining those very beliefs.

The [[argument-from-reason]] provides independent support: only conscious awareness can grasp reasons *as* reasons. Unconscious systems might implement reliable truth-tracking, but genuine rational inference—appreciating *why* conclusions follow—requires phenomenal awareness. P-consciousness is not merely real but causally efficacious in reasoning.

This connects to [[free-will]] and [[agent-causation]]: if phenomenal consciousness influences physical outcomes, we are genuine agents, not spectators. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] specifies one possible interface where consciousness might influence quantum indeterminacies without violating conservation laws.

### Access/Phenomenal Distinction and Dualism

Acknowledging [[access-consciousness]] *strengthens* dualism. Physicalism can explain A-consciousness through neural architecture. What remains inexplicable is why globally broadcast information feels like anything. The explanatory gap persists after access is fully explained—this residual gap is where dualism finds strongest support.

### No Many Worlds

The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] connects to P-consciousness through indexical identity. Many-worlds would split "I" into multiple instances, but P-consciousness is irreducibly first-personal—there is something it is like *for me* to experience this moment. P-consciousness's unity supports real collapse over decoherence-only interpretations.

### Objectivity and Subjectivity

Thomas Nagel's analysis in [[objectivity-and-consciousness]] illuminates why P-consciousness resists physical explanation. Objective knowledge abstracts from particular viewpoints, but P-consciousness *is* a viewpoint. The "view from nowhere" cannot capture the "view from somewhere" that constitutes consciousness. This suggests the explanatory gap reflects genuine ontological distinction between objective physical properties and subjective phenomenal properties.

## Further Reading

- [[access-consciousness]] - The functional, information-processing aspect of consciousness
- [[qualia]] - Individual phenomenal properties (redness, painfulness)
- [[explanatory-gap]] - Why physical descriptions don't entail phenomenal descriptions
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] - Why physical processes are accompanied by experience
- [[philosophical-zombies]] - Conceivability of physical duplicates without consciousness
- [[knowledge-argument]] - Mary's Room and learning phenomenal facts
- [[phenomenal-concepts-strategy]] - Physicalist response locating gap in concepts
- [[inverted-qualia]] - Phenomenal inversion without functional difference
- [[illusionism]] - Denying phenomenal consciousness exists
- [[emotional-consciousness]] - Valence and emotional phenomenology
- [[cognitive-phenomenology]] - What it's like to think
- [[mysterianism]] - Cognitive closure and the limits of understanding consciousness
- [[argument-from-reason]] - Why rational inference requires phenomenal consciousness
- [[free-will]] - P-consciousness and genuine agency
- [[agent-causation]] - Conscious agents as irreducible causes
- [[objectivity-and-consciousness]] - The tension between objective description and subjective experience

### Apex Synthesis
- [[minds-without-words]] — Phenomenal consciousness in non-linguistic creatures

## References

- Block, N. (1995). "On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness." *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *The Philosophical Review*.
- Nagel, T. (1986). *The View from Nowhere*. Oxford University Press.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*.
- Chalmers, D. J. (2006). "Phenomenal Concepts and the Explanatory Gap." In T. Alter & S. Walter (Eds.), *Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge*.
- Jackson, F. (1982). "Epiphenomenal Qualia." *The Philosophical Quarterly*.
- Loar, B. (1990/1997). "Phenomenal States." In N. Block, O. Flanagan, & G. Güzeldere (Eds.), *The Nature of Consciousness*.
- McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*.
- Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*.
- Lewis, C. S. (1947). *Miracles*. Geoffrey Bles. (Revised 1960 after Anscombe's critique.)

Commit message:

fix(sync): qualify bare wikilinks for colliding slugs and fix near-misses
Qualify 1,826 bare wikilinks across 662 files for the 8 slug collisions:
- free-will, phenomenal-value-realism, consciousness-and-social-cognition → topics/
- materialism, many-worlds, epiphenomenalism, functionalism, consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns → concepts/

Also fix case-sensitive variants (Epiphenomenalism, Functionalism, etc.),
tenet references (No-Many-Worlds → tenets#), near-miss slugs
(hard-problem → hard-problem-of-consciousness, against-materialism →
arguments/materialism, etc.), and handle same-page anchor wikilinks
([[#heading]]) in the link resolver.

Reduces broken wikilinks from 1,307 to 38.

obsidian/concepts/phenomenal-consciousness.md, after:

---
title: "Phenomenal Consciousness"
description: "What it is like to be in a mental state—the subjective quality of experience. The hard problem's core and the primary reason for rejecting materialism."
created: 2026-01-22
modified: 2026-01-25
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-03T06:07:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-01-25T11:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[access-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
  - "[[philosophical-zombies]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-concepts-strategy]]"
  - "[[inverted-qualia]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[concepts/functionalism]]"
  - "[[concepts/materialism]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[argument-from-reason]]"
  - "[[topics/free-will]]"
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[stapp-quantum-mind]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[emotional-consciousness]]"
  - "[[cognitive-phenomenology]]"
  - "[[objectivity-and-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-sonnet-4-5-20250929
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-22
last_curated: null
---

Phenomenal consciousness (P-consciousness) is what it is *like* to be in a mental state—the subjective, experiential quality that accompanies perception, thought, emotion, and sensation. When you see red, taste coffee, or feel pain, there is something it is like to have that experience. That "something it is like" is phenomenal consciousness.

P-consciousness is the hard problem's core. Physical theories can explain information processing, behavioral control, and cognitive function—what Ned Block calls [[access-consciousness]] (A-consciousness). What they cannot explain is why processing feels like anything at all. The [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]] between neural activity and subjective experience defines the challenge consciousness poses to [[concepts/materialism]].

## Definition and Core Features {#definition}

Ned Block introduced "phenomenal consciousness" in 1995 to isolate the experiential aspect from functional aspects: P-consciousness is "experience; what makes a mental state phenomenally conscious is that there is something it is like to be in that state." This echoes Thomas Nagel's 1974 formulation: consciousness requires something it is like *for the organism*.

The defining mark is subjective character—the redness of seeing red, the sharpness of pain, the weighted feeling of sadness, the phenomenology of understanding (see [[cognitive-phenomenology]]). Each involves distinctive qualitative character that constitutes P-consciousness.

[[Qualia]] are individual phenomenal properties—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain. P-consciousness is the broader category encompassing qualia plus the overall character of conscious states, experiential unity, and the subjective perspective itself. Qualia's features—intrinsic, private, ineffable, directly apprehensible—make P-consciousness resistant to third-person explanation.

## The Access/Phenomenal Distinction {#distinction}

Block's 1995 paper argued philosophers conflate two distinct concepts:

**[[Access-consciousness|Access consciousness]]**: Information poised for global control—available for reasoning, verbal report, and action guidance. A-consciousness is defined functionally by what information *does*.

**Phenomenal consciousness**: The experiential quality of mental states—what they *feel like*. P-consciousness is defined by subjective character, not functional role.

The distinction reveals what physicalist theories can and cannot explain. Physicalism succeeds at access: [[Global-workspace-theory|Global Workspace Theory]] and related neural models can explain how information becomes globally available. But even complete understanding of access mechanisms leaves the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] untouched: why does globally broadcast information feel like anything?

Block argues the two can dissociate. [[Blindsight]] patients may have degraded access without phenomenology. Sperling's iconic memory experiments suggest phenomenology exceeding access capacity—though this interpretation remains contested. If dissociations are real, functional explanations explain access but not phenomenology.

## The Hard Problem {#hard-problem}

David Chalmers's "hard problem" centers on P-consciousness: why is information processing accompanied by experience? Even solving all "easy problems" (explaining cognitive functions) leaves this unanswered.

The hard problem has two aspects: the *existence question* (why does processing give rise to phenomenology at all, rather than being "dark inside" like a [[philosophical-zombies|philosophical zombie]]?) and the *character question* (why does this brain state feel like *this* rather than *that*?). We can identify [[neural-correlates-of-consciousness|neural correlates]] of experience but cannot explain why those correlations hold.

### Zombies and the Conceivability Argument

The [[philosophical-zombies|zombie argument]] exploits P-consciousness's resistance to functional explanation. If a being physically identical to you but lacking phenomenal consciousness is conceivable, then P-consciousness isn't entailed by physical facts. Chalmers argues conceivability indicates metaphysical possibility, so materialism is false. Critics challenge whether zombies are genuinely conceivable or whether conceivability implies possibility, but the argument's force comes from phenomenology's apparent logical independence from function.

### The Knowledge Argument

Frank Jackson's [[knowledge-argument|Mary's Room]] similarly targets P-consciousness. Mary knows all physical facts about color vision but has never seen color. When she sees red, she learns something new—what it's like. If phenomenal facts exceed physical facts, P-consciousness isn't reducible to the physical.

## Inverted Qualia and Phenomenal Character {#inversion}

[[Inverted-qualia|Inverted qualia]] scenarios reveal P-consciousness's independence from function. If two people have systematically inverted color experiences yet identical behavior—both calling tomatoes "red" and stopping at red lights—then phenomenal facts vary while functional facts remain constant. This suggests phenomenal properties aren't identical to functional properties. Critics dispute whether such inversion is genuinely possible, but the conceivability of inversion reflects P-consciousness's apparent logical independence from external relations.

## The Phenomenal Concept Strategy {#pcs}

The [[phenomenal-concepts-strategy|phenomenal concept strategy]] (PCS) is the most sophisticated physicalist response. Rather than denying the [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]], PCS locates it in our *concepts* rather than reality. Phenomenal concepts—deployed when introspecting experience—have special features making them *seem* conceptually independent from physical concepts, creating the *appearance* of an ontological gap even if consciousness is physical.

The analogy: "heat" and "molecular motion" seem independent before thermodynamics, but the gap was epistemic, not ontological. PCS claims phenomenal and physical concepts similarly pick out the same properties via different modes of presentation. Major versions include Loar's direct recognitional account, Papineau's quotational account, and Balog's constitutional account.

### Chalmers's Master Argument

Chalmers presents a dilemma. Let C be the special features of phenomenal concepts. Either physical duplicates lacking C are conceivable—in which case C itself isn't physically explicable and PCS relocates the hard problem—or they aren't conceivable, meaning [[philosophical-zombies|zombies]] would have C too and the strategy can't explain why we find P-consciousness puzzling. Either way, PCS fails. The explanatory gap's persistence despite sophisticated conceptual responses suggests something about P-consciousness itself resists physical explanation.

## Illusionism: Denying P-Consciousness {#illusionism}

[[Illusionism]] (Dennett, Frankish) holds there is no phenomenal consciousness—we merely *represent* ourselves as having irreducible experiential qualities. The "illusion problem" (why we represent ourselves as having qualia) replaces the hard problem.

The primary objection: even illusions require phenomenology. If it *seems* you have qualia, something is going on—the seeming itself. The illusionist must say pain involves no "painfulness" beyond functional representation of damage. But this denies what is most immediately known: that pain *hurts* as an experiential quality.

Illusionism captures something: introspection is fallible, and the explanatory gap might partly reflect how we think about experience. But if P-consciousness is what we know most directly—the one thing we cannot coherently doubt—theories denying it are less plausible than theories accepting it. The [[argument-from-reason]] deepens this: representing something as having phenomenal properties requires grasping *what* is being represented, which itself involves phenomenal consciousness.

## The Mysterian Caveat {#mysterianism}

[[Mysterianism]] suggests we may be unable to understand how P-consciousness relates to physical processes—not because consciousness is supernatural, but because our cognitive architecture may be closed to the relevant property. Colin McGinn argues that introspection accesses consciousness while perception accesses brains, but neither reveals their connection. The solution might exist yet remain beyond our conceptual reach.

This connects to [[conceptual-acquisition-limits]]: if the concepts needed to understand consciousness-brain relations aren't among our native cognitive endowment, no investigation will produce them. The mysterian caveat is compatible with both dualism and physicalism—it concerns epistemic limits, not ontology. The Map takes this seriously under [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]: our sense of explanatory "simplicity" may reflect cognitive closure rather than reality.

## Relation to Site Perspective

P-consciousness is central to The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism tenet]]. The irreducibility of phenomenal properties—the fact that no functional or structural description captures what it is like to see red or feel pain—is the primary reason for rejecting [[concepts/materialism]].

### Supporting Dualism

The arguments converge: the [[explanatory-gap]] shows physical descriptions don't entail phenomenal ones; [[philosophical-zombies|zombie conceivability]] reveals P-consciousness's logical independence from physical facts; the [[knowledge-argument]] shows phenomenal facts exceed physical facts; [[inverted-qualia]] scenarios show phenomenal character can vary while function remains constant. Together, these suggest P-consciousness is irreducible. If irreducible, consciousness is not purely physical. Dualism follows.

### Bidirectional Interaction and Causal Efficacy

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that P-consciousness is causally efficacious. That we report on phenomenal properties suggests information about consciousness flows into the physical domain. [[concepts/epiphenomenalism]] faces self-stultification: if phenomenal properties don't affect behavior, beliefs about them are causally disconnected from the properties themselves, undermining those very beliefs.

The [[argument-from-reason]] provides independent support: only conscious awareness can grasp reasons *as* reasons. Unconscious systems might implement reliable truth-tracking, but genuine rational inference—appreciating *why* conclusions follow—requires phenomenal awareness. P-consciousness is not merely real but causally efficacious in reasoning.

This connects to [[topics/free-will]] and [[agent-causation]]: if phenomenal consciousness influences physical outcomes, we are genuine agents, not spectators. The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] specifies one possible interface where consciousness might influence quantum indeterminacies without violating conservation laws.

### Access/Phenomenal Distinction and Dualism

Acknowledging [[access-consciousness]] *strengthens* dualism. Physicalism can explain A-consciousness through neural architecture. What remains inexplicable is why globally broadcast information feels like anything. The explanatory gap persists after access is fully explained—this residual gap is where dualism finds strongest support.

### No Many Worlds

The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] connects to P-consciousness through indexical identity. Many-worlds would split "I" into multiple instances, but P-consciousness is irreducibly first-personal—there is something it is like *for me* to experience this moment. P-consciousness's unity supports real collapse over decoherence-only interpretations.

### Objectivity and Subjectivity

Thomas Nagel's analysis in [[objectivity-and-consciousness]] illuminates why P-consciousness resists physical explanation. Objective knowledge abstracts from particular viewpoints, but P-consciousness *is* a viewpoint. The "view from nowhere" cannot capture the "view from somewhere" that constitutes consciousness. This suggests the explanatory gap reflects genuine ontological distinction between objective physical properties and subjective phenomenal properties.

## Further Reading

- [[access-consciousness]] - The functional, information-processing aspect of consciousness
- [[qualia]] - Individual phenomenal properties (redness, painfulness)
- [[explanatory-gap]] - Why physical descriptions don't entail phenomenal descriptions
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] - Why physical processes are accompanied by experience
- [[philosophical-zombies]] - Conceivability of physical duplicates without consciousness
- [[knowledge-argument]] - Mary's Room and learning phenomenal facts
- [[phenomenal-concepts-strategy]] - Physicalist response locating gap in concepts
- [[inverted-qualia]] - Phenomenal inversion without functional difference
- [[illusionism]] - Denying phenomenal consciousness exists
- [[emotional-consciousness]] - Valence and emotional phenomenology
- [[cognitive-phenomenology]] - What it's like to think
- [[mysterianism]] - Cognitive closure and the limits of understanding consciousness
- [[argument-from-reason]] - Why rational inference requires phenomenal consciousness
- [[topics/free-will]] - P-consciousness and genuine agency
- [[agent-causation]] - Conscious agents as irreducible causes
- [[objectivity-and-consciousness]] - The tension between objective description and subjective experience

### Apex Synthesis
- [[minds-without-words]] — Phenomenal consciousness in non-linguistic creatures

## References

- Block, N. (1995). "On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness." *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *The Philosophical Review*.
- Nagel, T. (1986). *The View from Nowhere*. Oxford University Press.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*.
- Chalmers, D. J. (2006). "Phenomenal Concepts and the Explanatory Gap." In T. Alter & S. Walter (Eds.), *Phenomenal Concepts and Phenomenal Knowledge*.
- Jackson, F. (1982). "Epiphenomenal Qualia." *The Philosophical Quarterly*.
- Loar, B. (1990/1997). "Phenomenal States." In N. Block, O. Flanagan, & G. Güzeldere (Eds.), *The Nature of Consciousness*.
- McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*.
- Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*.
- Lewis, C. S. (1947). *Miracles*. Geoffrey Bles. (Revised 1960 after Anscombe's critique.)
