obsidian/concepts/phenomenal-overflow.md, before:

---
title: "Phenomenal Overflow"
description: "Ned Block's argument that phenomenal consciousness exceeds cognitive access—we experience more than we can report, suggesting phenomenology is richer than function."
created: 2026-01-28
modified: 2026-01-29
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-20T01:06:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-01-29T00:58:54+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[access-consciousness]]"
  - "[[global-workspace-theory]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[stapp-quantum-mind]]"
  - "[[working-memory]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[voids-pre-conceptual-knowing-2026-01-27]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-28
last_curated: null
---

Phenomenal overflow is Ned Block's argument that [[phenomenal-consciousness|phenomenal consciousness]] has richer content than [[access-consciousness]]—we experience more than we can report, think about, or use in reasoning. The overflow hypothesis challenges the identification of consciousness with cognitive access, suggesting that the "what it's like" of experience exceeds what enters the [[global-workspace-theory|global workspace]].

The argument matters for [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] because it separates phenomenology from function. If experience overflows accessibility, then functional theories that explain when information becomes reportable (like Global Workspace Theory) cannot be complete theories of consciousness. Something phenomenal exists beyond what functional descriptions capture.

## The Overflow Argument {#argument}

Block's overflow argument holds that phenomenal consciousness has higher capacity than cognitive access. The core claim: we are conscious of more than we can report or reason about at any moment.

### Sperling's Iconic Memory Paradigm

The primary evidence comes from George Sperling's 1960 experiments on iconic memory:

**Procedure**: Flash a grid of 12 letters (3 rows × 4 columns) for 50 milliseconds. Ask subjects to report what they saw.

**Whole report result**: Subjects can report only 4-5 letters—roughly one row. Working memory limits how much can be accessed and reported.

**Partial report result**: If a tone cues which row to report *immediately* after the display, subjects can accurately report any row with high accuracy (about 3 of 4 letters).

**The inference**: Subjects must have had phenomenal access to all 12 letters—otherwise, how could they report any cued row? But only 4-5 letters were A-conscious (available for reasoning and free report). The remaining letters were P-conscious but not A-conscious.

Block's formulation: "Perceptual consciousness is richer (i.e., has a higher capacity) than cognitive access."

### What Overflow Would Show

If phenomenal overflow is real:

1. **P-consciousness ≠ A-consciousness**: The two can dissociate in degree, not just kind
2. **Functional theories are incomplete**: Explaining when information becomes accessible doesn't explain phenomenology
3. **The hard problem persists**: Even complete access-explanations leave phenomenal richness unexplained
4. **Introspection has limits**: We cannot fully report our own experience

## The Deflationary Response {#deflationary}

Critics—notably Daniel Dennett and Michael Cohen—argue that overflow is an illusion. On their view, subjects don't experience all 12 letters; they experience a *general impression* ("lots of letters") that becomes specific only when the cue directs attention.

### The Deflationary Interpretation

**No rich phenomenology**: Subjects have a gestalt impression of "letterishness" in the uncued regions, not specific letter-experiences. The sense that they "saw all the letters" is a post-hoc judgment, not a report of actual phenomenology.

**Retroactive construction**: When the cue arrives, attention accesses iconic memory traces and constructs the specific experience. The phenomenology is created by the access process, not accessed by it.

**Inflation fallacy**: Subjects mistake the *ability* to access any row (partial report success) for *actually having accessed* all rows simultaneously. But ability doesn't entail prior experience.

### Introspective Fallibility

Deflationary theorists invoke a broader point: introspection is notoriously unreliable. Subjects confidently misreport their mental states in numerous well-documented cases—change blindness, inattentional blindness, confabulation in split-brain patients. Why should phenomenal reports about "seeing all the letters" be trusted when other introspective reports are demonstrably wrong?

Block's response: the partial report paradigm provides behavioral evidence independent of introspection. The ability to report any cued row with high accuracy shows *something* was available—the dispute is whether that something was phenomenally conscious. The behavioral data constrain the options more than bare introspective reports would.

### Why Deflationism Deserves Consideration

The deflationary reading isn't merely dismissive. It raises a genuine methodological problem: how do we distinguish rich phenomenology from the impression of rich phenomenology?

Subjects report "I saw all the letters"—but this report is itself an A-conscious judgment. If P-consciousness were truly richer than A-consciousness, we could never directly verify it through reports, since reports *are* access. The overflow hypothesis may be unfalsifiable.

Cohen and Dennett argue: "Consciousness cannot be separated from function." If there's no functional difference between having rich phenomenology and merely believing one has rich phenomenology, the distinction may be empty.

## Additional Evidence {#evidence}

Beyond Sperling, several phenomena suggest phenomenal overflow:

### Inattentional Blindness

In inattentional blindness experiments, subjects fail to notice salient stimuli (like a gorilla walking through a scene) when attention is engaged elsewhere. Yet recent work by Nartker et al. (2025) found that "inattentionally blind" participants retain visual sensitivity to stimuli they explicitly deny noticing—they can report location, colour, and shape of objects they claim not to have seen.

This suggests phenomenology may persist even when workspace broadcast fails. But deflationary theorists respond that this residual sensitivity reflects degraded access rather than rich phenomenology outside access.

### The Fineness of Grain Argument

Our perceptual experience discriminates shades of color, spatial positions, and temporal moments more finely than we have concepts for. You can see the difference between two nearly identical shades even if you have no names for either. The experience outstrips the conceptual capacity to categorize and report.

McDowell's response—that demonstrative concepts like "that shade" can be as fine-grained as needed—faces a problem: demonstrative concepts require re-identification capacity, which we lack for precise shades. The concept dissolves when the experience ends.

### Change Blindness and Its Limits

Change blindness shows we miss large changes between scenes when attention is diverted. This might seem to argue *against* rich phenomenology—if we don't notice a change, perhaps we didn't experience the original. But subjects often report a vague sense that "something is different" without being able to identify what. This suggests phenomenology exceeding explicit access.

## Theoretical Stakes {#stakes}

The overflow debate isn't merely empirical—it has theoretical stakes for understanding consciousness.

### For Global Workspace Theory

[[Global-workspace-theory|GWT]] explains A-consciousness: information becomes globally broadcast through prefrontal-parietal ignition, making it available for reasoning, report, and action. If phenomenology equals access, GWT would be a complete theory of consciousness.

But if overflow is real, GWT explains only *part* of consciousness. The unaccessed phenomenal field—what you experience but can't report—lies outside GWT's explanatory scope. This limits GWT to being a theory of access, not phenomenology.

### For Functionalism

[[concepts/functionalism]] defines mental states by their causal-functional roles. A-consciousness fits functionalism perfectly—it's defined by what information *does*. But P-consciousness, especially overflowing P-consciousness, resists functional definition. If experience exceeds function, functionalism cannot capture it.

The overflow argument strengthens anti-functionalist arguments like [[inverted-qualia|inverted qualia]] and [[philosophical-zombies|zombies]]. If phenomenology can exceed function in *degree* (overflow), perhaps it can diverge from function in *character* (inversion) or exist without function entirely (zombies).

### For Illusionism

[[Illusionism]] holds that phenomenal consciousness is an illusion—we represent ourselves as having irreducible experiential qualities when we don't. Illusionism aligns with deflationary readings of overflow: the *sense* of rich phenomenology is just another functional state, not evidence of genuine phenomenology beyond function.

If overflow is real, illusionism must explain why we would systematically represent ourselves as having richer experience than we do. The illusion would need to be not merely about *having* phenomenology but about phenomenology *exceeding* access—a more elaborate error.

## Relation to Site Perspective {#tenets}

### Dualism

Phenomenal overflow supports [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] by separating phenomenology from function. If phenomenal consciousness exceeds what functional theories can explain—even theories as sophisticated as GWT—then consciousness has features that physical/functional description cannot capture.

The logic parallels other anti-physicalist arguments:
- **Zombies**: Function without phenomenology is conceivable
- **Inverted qualia**: Phenomenology can vary while function stays constant
- **Overflow**: Phenomenology can exceed function in capacity

Each shows phenomenal properties are not identical to functional properties. If function doesn't constitute phenomenology, something beyond function does. This points toward irreducible phenomenal properties—the dualist claim.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences the physical world. Overflow complicates but doesn't undermine this claim.

If phenomenology exceeds access, what role does the "extra" phenomenology play? One possibility: the overflowing phenomenal field is where consciousness operates most fundamentally. [[Attention-as-interface|Attention selects]] from this field what enters access—and attention may be where consciousness exercises causal influence.

On this view, the rich phenomenal field is the stage; attention is conscious selection; access is the downstream result. [[Stapp-quantum-mind|Stapp's quantum Zeno model]] proposes a specific mechanism: sustained attention (rapid repeated observations) could bias quantum indeterminacies toward particular neural patterns, determining what gets selected from the phenomenal field for access and action. Whether or not this specific mechanism is correct, the structural point remains: overflow suggests phenomenology is primary, and access is the result of conscious selection from richer phenomenal material.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

The deflationary response to overflow appeals to parsimony: why posit rich phenomenology beyond access when the impression of rich phenomenology suffices? This reflects the materialist strategy of explaining away apparent features of consciousness rather than explaining them.

But [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor has limits]]. The parsimony of deflationary accounts comes at the cost of dismissing what subjects report: they say they saw all the letters, not that they had an impression of letterishness. Deflationary theories require subjects to be systematically wrong about their own experience.

When a theory's parsimony requires dismissing the primary data (subjective reports), parsimony may mislead. The overflow hypothesis accepts phenomenal reports at face value; deflationism reinterprets them as judgments about what *seemed* to happen rather than reports of what was experienced. Both approaches have costs—the question is which costs are more acceptable.

## The Contested Status {#contested}

Phenomenal overflow remains genuinely contested. The Map presents it as evidence for the richness of phenomenology beyond function, not as established fact.

**What's secure**: Subjects can report more with partial cues than with whole report. Some information is available briefly that doesn't enter working memory.

**What's contested**: Whether this available-but-unreported information is phenomenally conscious. The debate hinges on whether phenomenology can exist without access—which is precisely what's at issue between overflow proponents and deflationary critics.

**The methodological bind**: If phenomenology exceeds access, we cannot directly verify it through access-dependent methods (reports, reasoning about experience). The overflow hypothesis may be unfalsifiable from a strictly third-person perspective. This unfalsifiability is generally a mark against a hypothesis—yet it's also exactly what we'd expect if phenomenology genuinely transcends function. The situation is frustrating rather than decisive: unfalsifiability doesn't confirm overflow, but neither does it refute it.

This connects to [[pre-conceptual-knowing]]—the void of experience that exceeds conceptualization. If phenomenal overflow is real, it exemplifies this broader limit: there may be aspects of experience that resist not just verbal report but cognitive access altogether.

## Further Reading

- [[access-consciousness]]—the functional aspect that overflow exceeds
- [[phenomenal-consciousness]]—the "what it's like" that may overflow
- [[global-workspace-theory]]—theory of access that may not capture full phenomenology
- [[introspection]]—the method by which we access (and possibly miss) experience
- [[attention]]—the selective mechanism between phenomenal field and access
- [[attention-as-interface]]—how attention might mediate conscious selection
- [[stapp-quantum-mind]]—a proposed mechanism for conscious selection from phenomenal overflow
- [[pre-conceptual-knowing]]—the broader void of experience beyond concepts

## References

- Block, N. (1995). On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 18, 227-287.
- Block, N. (2011). Perceptual consciousness overflows cognitive access. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 15(12), 567-575.
- Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief visual presentations. *Psychological Monographs*, 74(11), 1-29.
- Cohen, M. A., & Dennett, D. C. (2011). Consciousness cannot be separated from function. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 15(8), 358-364.
- Nartker, M., Firestone, C., & Sosa, E. (2025). Inattentional blindness hides residual visual sensitivity. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance*.
- Kelly, S. D. (2001). The Non-Conceptual Content of Perceptual Experience: Situation Dependence and Fineness of Grain. *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research*, 62(3), 601-608.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): sharpen review and add 12 inbound links for topics/perception-and-conscious-experience.md
- Article had zero inbound links (orphaned); added cross-references from 15 existing articles
- Linked from concepts: qualia, blindsight, binding-problem, phenomenal-transparency, phenomenal-consciousness, access-consciousness, knowledge-argument, explanatory-gap, visual-consciousness, intentionality, phenomenal-overflow, conscious-vs-unconscious-processing
- Linked from topics: philosophy-of-perception-under-dualism, hard-problem-of-consciousness, attention-consciousness-dissociation
- No content changes to reviewed article itself (2102 words stable); all 6 citations verified correct
- Review archive saved to reviews/deep-review-2026-02-25-perception-and-conscious-experience.md

obsidian/concepts/phenomenal-overflow.md, after:

---
title: "Phenomenal Overflow"
description: "Ned Block's argument that phenomenal consciousness exceeds cognitive access—we experience more than we can report, suggesting phenomenology is richer than function."
created: 2026-01-28
modified: 2026-01-29
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-25T11:29:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-01-29T00:58:54+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[access-consciousness]]"
  - "[[global-workspace-theory]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[stapp-quantum-mind]]"
  - "[[working-memory]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[voids-pre-conceptual-knowing-2026-01-27]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-28
last_curated: null
---

Phenomenal overflow is Ned Block's argument that [[phenomenal-consciousness|phenomenal consciousness]] has richer content than [[access-consciousness]]—we experience more than we can report, think about, or use in reasoning. The overflow hypothesis challenges the identification of consciousness with cognitive access, suggesting that the "what it's like" of experience exceeds what enters the [[global-workspace-theory|global workspace]].

The argument matters for [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] because it separates phenomenology from function. Overflow is one of several features of [[perception-and-conscious-experience|perceptual experience]] that resist reduction to neural processing. If experience overflows accessibility, then functional theories that explain when information becomes reportable (like Global Workspace Theory) cannot be complete theories of consciousness. Something phenomenal exists beyond what functional descriptions capture.

## The Overflow Argument {#argument}

Block's overflow argument holds that phenomenal consciousness has higher capacity than cognitive access. The core claim: we are conscious of more than we can report or reason about at any moment.

### Sperling's Iconic Memory Paradigm

The primary evidence comes from George Sperling's 1960 experiments on iconic memory:

**Procedure**: Flash a grid of 12 letters (3 rows × 4 columns) for 50 milliseconds. Ask subjects to report what they saw.

**Whole report result**: Subjects can report only 4-5 letters—roughly one row. Working memory limits how much can be accessed and reported.

**Partial report result**: If a tone cues which row to report *immediately* after the display, subjects can accurately report any row with high accuracy (about 3 of 4 letters).

**The inference**: Subjects must have had phenomenal access to all 12 letters—otherwise, how could they report any cued row? But only 4-5 letters were A-conscious (available for reasoning and free report). The remaining letters were P-conscious but not A-conscious.

Block's formulation: "Perceptual consciousness is richer (i.e., has a higher capacity) than cognitive access."

### What Overflow Would Show

If phenomenal overflow is real:

1. **P-consciousness ≠ A-consciousness**: The two can dissociate in degree, not just kind
2. **Functional theories are incomplete**: Explaining when information becomes accessible doesn't explain phenomenology
3. **The hard problem persists**: Even complete access-explanations leave phenomenal richness unexplained
4. **Introspection has limits**: We cannot fully report our own experience

## The Deflationary Response {#deflationary}

Critics—notably Daniel Dennett and Michael Cohen—argue that overflow is an illusion. On their view, subjects don't experience all 12 letters; they experience a *general impression* ("lots of letters") that becomes specific only when the cue directs attention.

### The Deflationary Interpretation

**No rich phenomenology**: Subjects have a gestalt impression of "letterishness" in the uncued regions, not specific letter-experiences. The sense that they "saw all the letters" is a post-hoc judgment, not a report of actual phenomenology.

**Retroactive construction**: When the cue arrives, attention accesses iconic memory traces and constructs the specific experience. The phenomenology is created by the access process, not accessed by it.

**Inflation fallacy**: Subjects mistake the *ability* to access any row (partial report success) for *actually having accessed* all rows simultaneously. But ability doesn't entail prior experience.

### Introspective Fallibility

Deflationary theorists invoke a broader point: introspection is notoriously unreliable. Subjects confidently misreport their mental states in numerous well-documented cases—change blindness, inattentional blindness, confabulation in split-brain patients. Why should phenomenal reports about "seeing all the letters" be trusted when other introspective reports are demonstrably wrong?

Block's response: the partial report paradigm provides behavioral evidence independent of introspection. The ability to report any cued row with high accuracy shows *something* was available—the dispute is whether that something was phenomenally conscious. The behavioral data constrain the options more than bare introspective reports would.

### Why Deflationism Deserves Consideration

The deflationary reading isn't merely dismissive. It raises a genuine methodological problem: how do we distinguish rich phenomenology from the impression of rich phenomenology?

Subjects report "I saw all the letters"—but this report is itself an A-conscious judgment. If P-consciousness were truly richer than A-consciousness, we could never directly verify it through reports, since reports *are* access. The overflow hypothesis may be unfalsifiable.

Cohen and Dennett argue: "Consciousness cannot be separated from function." If there's no functional difference between having rich phenomenology and merely believing one has rich phenomenology, the distinction may be empty.

## Additional Evidence {#evidence}

Beyond Sperling, several phenomena suggest phenomenal overflow:

### Inattentional Blindness

In inattentional blindness experiments, subjects fail to notice salient stimuli (like a gorilla walking through a scene) when attention is engaged elsewhere. Yet recent work by Nartker et al. (2025) found that "inattentionally blind" participants retain visual sensitivity to stimuli they explicitly deny noticing—they can report location, colour, and shape of objects they claim not to have seen.

This suggests phenomenology may persist even when workspace broadcast fails. But deflationary theorists respond that this residual sensitivity reflects degraded access rather than rich phenomenology outside access.

### The Fineness of Grain Argument

Our perceptual experience discriminates shades of color, spatial positions, and temporal moments more finely than we have concepts for. You can see the difference between two nearly identical shades even if you have no names for either. The experience outstrips the conceptual capacity to categorize and report.

McDowell's response—that demonstrative concepts like "that shade" can be as fine-grained as needed—faces a problem: demonstrative concepts require re-identification capacity, which we lack for precise shades. The concept dissolves when the experience ends.

### Change Blindness and Its Limits

Change blindness shows we miss large changes between scenes when attention is diverted. This might seem to argue *against* rich phenomenology—if we don't notice a change, perhaps we didn't experience the original. But subjects often report a vague sense that "something is different" without being able to identify what. This suggests phenomenology exceeding explicit access.

## Theoretical Stakes {#stakes}

The overflow debate isn't merely empirical—it has theoretical stakes for understanding consciousness.

### For Global Workspace Theory

[[Global-workspace-theory|GWT]] explains A-consciousness: information becomes globally broadcast through prefrontal-parietal ignition, making it available for reasoning, report, and action. If phenomenology equals access, GWT would be a complete theory of consciousness.

But if overflow is real, GWT explains only *part* of consciousness. The unaccessed phenomenal field—what you experience but can't report—lies outside GWT's explanatory scope. This limits GWT to being a theory of access, not phenomenology.

### For Functionalism

[[concepts/functionalism]] defines mental states by their causal-functional roles. A-consciousness fits functionalism perfectly—it's defined by what information *does*. But P-consciousness, especially overflowing P-consciousness, resists functional definition. If experience exceeds function, functionalism cannot capture it.

The overflow argument strengthens anti-functionalist arguments like [[inverted-qualia|inverted qualia]] and [[philosophical-zombies|zombies]]. If phenomenology can exceed function in *degree* (overflow), perhaps it can diverge from function in *character* (inversion) or exist without function entirely (zombies).

### For Illusionism

[[Illusionism]] holds that phenomenal consciousness is an illusion—we represent ourselves as having irreducible experiential qualities when we don't. Illusionism aligns with deflationary readings of overflow: the *sense* of rich phenomenology is just another functional state, not evidence of genuine phenomenology beyond function.

If overflow is real, illusionism must explain why we would systematically represent ourselves as having richer experience than we do. The illusion would need to be not merely about *having* phenomenology but about phenomenology *exceeding* access—a more elaborate error.

## Relation to Site Perspective {#tenets}

### Dualism

Phenomenal overflow supports [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] by separating phenomenology from function. If phenomenal consciousness exceeds what functional theories can explain—even theories as sophisticated as GWT—then consciousness has features that physical/functional description cannot capture.

The logic parallels other anti-physicalist arguments:
- **Zombies**: Function without phenomenology is conceivable
- **Inverted qualia**: Phenomenology can vary while function stays constant
- **Overflow**: Phenomenology can exceed function in capacity

Each shows phenomenal properties are not identical to functional properties. If function doesn't constitute phenomenology, something beyond function does. This points toward irreducible phenomenal properties—the dualist claim.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences the physical world. Overflow complicates but doesn't undermine this claim.

If phenomenology exceeds access, what role does the "extra" phenomenology play? One possibility: the overflowing phenomenal field is where consciousness operates most fundamentally. [[Attention-as-interface|Attention selects]] from this field what enters access—and attention may be where consciousness exercises causal influence.

On this view, the rich phenomenal field is the stage; attention is conscious selection; access is the downstream result. [[Stapp-quantum-mind|Stapp's quantum Zeno model]] proposes a specific mechanism: sustained attention (rapid repeated observations) could bias quantum indeterminacies toward particular neural patterns, determining what gets selected from the phenomenal field for access and action. Whether or not this specific mechanism is correct, the structural point remains: overflow suggests phenomenology is primary, and access is the result of conscious selection from richer phenomenal material.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

The deflationary response to overflow appeals to parsimony: why posit rich phenomenology beyond access when the impression of rich phenomenology suffices? This reflects the materialist strategy of explaining away apparent features of consciousness rather than explaining them.

But [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor has limits]]. The parsimony of deflationary accounts comes at the cost of dismissing what subjects report: they say they saw all the letters, not that they had an impression of letterishness. Deflationary theories require subjects to be systematically wrong about their own experience.

When a theory's parsimony requires dismissing the primary data (subjective reports), parsimony may mislead. The overflow hypothesis accepts phenomenal reports at face value; deflationism reinterprets them as judgments about what *seemed* to happen rather than reports of what was experienced. Both approaches have costs—the question is which costs are more acceptable.

## The Contested Status {#contested}

Phenomenal overflow remains genuinely contested. The Map presents it as evidence for the richness of phenomenology beyond function, not as established fact.

**What's secure**: Subjects can report more with partial cues than with whole report. Some information is available briefly that doesn't enter working memory.

**What's contested**: Whether this available-but-unreported information is phenomenally conscious. The debate hinges on whether phenomenology can exist without access—which is precisely what's at issue between overflow proponents and deflationary critics.

**The methodological bind**: If phenomenology exceeds access, we cannot directly verify it through access-dependent methods (reports, reasoning about experience). The overflow hypothesis may be unfalsifiable from a strictly third-person perspective. This unfalsifiability is generally a mark against a hypothesis—yet it's also exactly what we'd expect if phenomenology genuinely transcends function. The situation is frustrating rather than decisive: unfalsifiability doesn't confirm overflow, but neither does it refute it.

This connects to [[pre-conceptual-knowing]]—the void of experience that exceeds conceptualization. If phenomenal overflow is real, it exemplifies this broader limit: there may be aspects of experience that resist not just verbal report but cognitive access altogether.

## Further Reading

- [[access-consciousness]]—the functional aspect that overflow exceeds
- [[phenomenal-consciousness]]—the "what it's like" that may overflow
- [[global-workspace-theory]]—theory of access that may not capture full phenomenology
- [[introspection]]—the method by which we access (and possibly miss) experience
- [[attention]]—the selective mechanism between phenomenal field and access
- [[attention-as-interface]]—how attention might mediate conscious selection
- [[stapp-quantum-mind]]—a proposed mechanism for conscious selection from phenomenal overflow
- [[pre-conceptual-knowing]]—the broader void of experience beyond concepts

## References

- Block, N. (1995). On a Confusion about a Function of Consciousness. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 18, 227-287.
- Block, N. (2011). Perceptual consciousness overflows cognitive access. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 15(12), 567-575.
- Sperling, G. (1960). The information available in brief visual presentations. *Psychological Monographs*, 74(11), 1-29.
- Cohen, M. A., & Dennett, D. C. (2011). Consciousness cannot be separated from function. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 15(8), 358-364.
- Nartker, M., Firestone, C., & Sosa, E. (2025). Inattentional blindness hides residual visual sensitivity. *Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance*.
- Kelly, S. D. (2001). The Non-Conceptual Content of Perceptual Experience: Situation Dependence and Fineness of Grain. *Philosophy and Phenomenological Research*, 62(3), 601-608.
