obsidian/concepts/process-philosophy.md, before:

---
title: "Process Philosophy"
description: "A metaphysical tradition treating reality as fundamentally dynamic—events and processes rather than static substances. Whitehead's framework offers resources for consciousness studies."
created: 2026-01-27
modified: 2026-01-27
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-27T19:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[duration]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[emergence]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-unity]]"
  - "[[temporal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[dualism]]"
  - "[[combination-problem]]"
  - "[[downward-causation]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-27
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-27T19:30:00+00:00
---

Process philosophy holds that reality is fundamentally dynamic—constituted by events, processes, and becoming rather than static substances or objects. Where traditional metaphysics asks "What things exist?", process philosophy asks "What is happening?" The shift matters for consciousness studies: if experience is intrinsically temporal and flowing, perhaps the universe is too.

Alfred North Whitehead developed the most systematic process metaphysics in *Process and Reality* (1929). Henri Bergson anticipated key themes with his concept of [[duration|durée]]. Together they offer a framework where consciousness isn't anomalous—an experiential spark in an inert universe—but exemplary of reality's fundamental character.

## Core Claims

### Events Over Substances

Traditional metaphysics (from Aristotle through Descartes) treats reality as composed of substances—entities that persist through time and bear changing properties. A rock exists; it *has* a location that changes. Process philosophy inverts this: the fundamental units are events or "actual occasions" that happen and perish. What we call a rock is a pattern in the flow of events—a relatively stable nexus of occasions, not an enduring thing.

This dissolves the apparent gap between mind and matter. Consciousness isn't a substance mysteriously interacting with physical substance; both are modes of process. The experiential and physical are different aspects of the same underlying becoming.

### Prehension and Experience

Whitehead introduced "prehension" to describe how each actual occasion takes account of prior occasions. Every event "prehends" (grasps, includes) its predecessors—not by mechanically receiving causal influences but by incorporating them into its own constitution. The past doesn't push events from behind; events actively integrate the past into novel unities.

Crucially, Whitehead denied "vacuous actuality"—the idea of utterly non-experiential matter. Every actual occasion involves some form of experience, however primitive. This is Whitehead's [[panpsychism|panpsychism]]: not that electrons have rich inner lives, but that experiential taking-account-of is fundamental to reality.

Human consciousness, on this view, is highly organised experience—what Whitehead called a "society" of actual occasions forming a "personally ordered" stream. We're not different in kind from the rest of nature, just more complexly integrated.

### Concrescence and Creativity

Each actual occasion undergoes "concrescence"—a process of growing together (from the Latin *concrescere*). The occasion inherits data from its predecessors, synthesises them through subjective aim, and achieves definite form. Then it perishes, becoming datum for successor occasions.

This rhythm of becoming-perishing-becoming is creativity itself. Whitehead calls creativity "the ultimate category"—the process by which the many become one and are increased by one. Each moment adds something to reality that didn't exist before. Time isn't a container events pass through; it's constituted by the creative advance of events.

## Bergson and Duration

Henri Bergson's philosophy of [[duration]] shares process philosophy's rejection of static metaphysics. His *durée* names the qualitative, interpenetrating flow of lived time—fundamentally different from the spatialized time of physics where moments are discrete points on a line.

Key parallels with Whitehead:

**Time as creative**: Both reject determinism's claim that the future is fixed by the past. Bergson: "Time is invention or it is nothing at all." Whitehead: creativity generates genuine novelty at each moment.

**Experience as paradigmatic**: Both treat consciousness not as anomaly but as revealing something fundamental. For Bergson, durée is what we most directly know; physics abstracts from it. For Whitehead, experience is the intrinsic character of actuality that physics describes only structurally.

**Unity-in-difference**: Bergson's "qualitative multiplicity" parallels Whitehead's concrescence. In both, the many don't just aggregate—they interpenetrate, forming novel unities where each element is colored by the others.

The traditions diverge on temporal atomism. Whitehead's actual occasions are discrete (though internally temporal); Bergson's durée is continuous flux. But both reject the view that time is a sequence of static states.

## The Combination Problem

Process philosophy's panpsychist tendency inherits the [[combination-problem|combination problem]]: if fundamental events are experiential, how do many micro-experiences combine into unified consciousness? William James's objection—that conscious states seem "shut in their own skin"—applies as forcefully to Whiteheadian occasions as to particles.

Whitehead's answer involves the "personally ordered society"—a stream of occasions where each inherits from its predecessors with peculiar intimacy, creating the continuity we experience as a self. But critics argue this doesn't explain *why* inheritance feels unified rather than merely serial. Why does prehending my past occasion feel like being the same subject, rather than like reading someone else's diary?

Process philosophers offer several responses:

**The inheritance asymmetry**: Occasions prehend their immediate predecessors with a directness unlike lateral prehension of contemporaries. This asymmetric intimacy constitutes personal identity.

**[[phenomenal-unity|Phenomenal unity]] as achievement**: Unity isn't assumed but achieved—each occasion must successfully synthesise its inheritance. The combination problem asks how micro-experiences combine; process philosophy answers: through the creative synthesis each occasion performs.

**Societies and emergence**: Complex organisms are hierarchically organised societies where "dominant occasions" integrate lower-level processes. The brain doesn't experience; the dominant occasion presiding over the brain does, inheriting from neural processes as its data.

Whether these responses succeed is debated. The combination problem remains process philosophy's central challenge.

## Relevance to Consciousness Studies

Process philosophy offers distinctive resources for thinking about consciousness:

### Against Emergence from the Inert

If experience is fundamental to actuality, consciousness doesn't mysteriously emerge from non-conscious matter. The [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] dissolves—or rather, never arises. There's no gap between experiential and non-experiential because reality is experiential all the way down.

This aligns with the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet's claim that consciousness is irreducible. Process philosophy and the Map agree: consciousness isn't generated by physical processes.

### Temporal Structure

The [[duration#The "Missing Link" in Consciousness Theories|missing link]] in consciousness theories—their failure to explain experienced duration—finds natural treatment in process philosophy. If reality *is* temporal process, then conscious experience doesn't mysteriously add temporality to static matter. The flow of experience reflects the flow of reality.

### Causation and Agency

Whitehead's occasions have "subjective aim"—each steers its own becoming toward satisfaction. This provides resources for [[agent-causation|agent causation]]: free acts aren't anomalies requiring special explanation but instances of the goal-directedness inherent in all actuality.

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet claims consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. Process philosophy suggests *all* actuality involves this kind of causation—experience aiming at satisfaction and thereby shaping what becomes.

## Tensions with the Map's Framework

Despite affinities, process philosophy sits uneasily with some of the Map's commitments:

### Panpsychism vs. Interactionist Dualism

The Map prefers interactionist dualism: consciousness is distinct from matter but interacts with it via quantum indeterminacy. Process philosophy dissolves this distinction—experience *is* the intrinsic nature of actuality, not a separate category interacting with it.

This matters practically. The Map's framework explains why rocks lack experience (no interface for consciousness to engage with matter) while brains have it (quantum processes provide that interface). Process philosophy must attribute some experience to rocks—however primitive—which many find counterintuitive.

### The Quantum Connection

The Map's [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet proposes consciousness influences quantum outcomes. Process philosophy, developed before quantum mechanics matured, offers no specific mechanism. Some process philosophers have incorporated quantum insights—noting that wave function collapse resembles Whiteheadian concrescence—but the connection remains underdeveloped.

Henry Stapp explicitly builds on Whitehead's framework, proposing that quantum events are the modern physics counterpart to actual occasions. For Stapp, the "Heisenberg choice" (which observable to measure) and the "Dirac choice" (which outcome occurs) parallel Whitehead's subjective aim and satisfaction. This represents the most developed attempt to integrate process philosophy with quantum mechanics, though it remains controversial.

### No Many Worlds

The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet rejects the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. Process philosophy is broadly compatible with this rejection: actual occasions achieve definite outcomes rather than splitting into parallel branches. But Whitehead's framework doesn't explicitly address quantum interpretations.

## What Process Philosophy Gets Right

The Map affirms several process insights:

**Reality is dynamic**: Static substance metaphysics struggles with consciousness—a process that unfolds in time. If reality is fundamentally processual, consciousness isn't an awkward addition.

**Experience is fundamental**: Both the Map and process philosophy deny that experience emerges from non-experiential matter. They differ on *how* it's fundamental—as the intrinsic nature of all actuality (process view) or as a distinct category interacting with matter (the Map's view).

**Time matters**: The Map's framework emphasises temporal consciousness, agency across time, and the irreversibility of experience. Process philosophy provides metaphysical grounding for taking temporality seriously.

**Creativity is real**: Both reject determinism. Free acts bring genuine novelty. The future isn't fixed by the past.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Process philosophy shares the Map's anti-materialist orientation but takes a different route. The Map maintains dualism—consciousness and matter as distinct—while process philosophy dissolves the distinction into processual monism where everything is experiential event.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: The Map says consciousness is irreducible to physical processes. Process philosophy agrees consciousness is irreducible but denies "physical processes" are non-experiential in the first place. The reduction fails not because consciousness is distinct from matter but because matter isn't what materialists think.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: Process philosophy doesn't specifically address quantum mechanics, though parallels have been drawn between wave function collapse and concrescence. The Map's specific commitment to quantum-level mind-matter interaction has no direct process equivalent.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Whitehead's subjective aim gives each occasion causal efficacy. Process philosophy strongly supports the claim that experience makes a difference—indeed, it claims all causation involves experiential synthesis.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Process philosophy's emphasis on definite actualisation—occasions achieving particular form—aligns with rejecting many-worlds. Each concrescence produces one outcome, not splitting branches.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Process philosophy exemplifies the tenet: Whitehead's framework is elaborate, but the apparent simplicity of materialist alternatives comes at the cost of ignoring experience. Sometimes complexity better captures reality.

Process philosophy remains a valuable interlocutor for the Map—a fellow traveler rejecting materialism, though taking a different path.

## Testability and Limitations

Process philosophy is primarily a metaphysical framework rather than a scientific theory. Its core claims—that reality is processual, that experience is fundamental—don't generate distinctive empirical predictions that would distinguish them from alternatives. Terms like "prehension" and "actual occasions" describe metaphysical structure without specifying observable consequences.

This isn't unique to process philosophy; the same applies to substance metaphysics and many interpretations of quantum mechanics. But it means process philosophy's value lies in conceptual clarification rather than empirical prediction. It offers a framework for thinking about consciousness that avoids certain problems (emergence from the non-experiential) while facing others (combination). Whether that framework illuminates reality depends on philosophical argument, not experimental test.

## Further Reading

- [[duration]] — Bergson's durée and its connection to Whiteheadian process
- [[panpsychism]] — The view that experience is ubiquitous; process philosophy's natural ally
- [[combination-problem]] — The central challenge for panpsychist and process approaches
- [[emergence]] — What process philosophy says about how complexity arises
- [[phenomenal-unity]] — How many experiences become one
- [[temporal-consciousness]] — The neuroscience of time experience
- [[downward-causation]] — How higher-level processes influence lower-level ones
- [[agent-causation]] — The self as originator of action
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The puzzle process philosophy claims to dissolve

## References

- Bergson, H. (1889/2001). *Time and Free Will*. Dover.
- Bergson, H. (1907/1998). *Creative Evolution*. Dover.
- Cobb, J. B. & Griffin, D. R. (1976). *Process Theology: An Introductory Exposition*. Westminster Press.
- Griffin, D. R. (1998). *Unsnarling the World-Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and the Mind-Body Problem*. University of California Press.
- Rescher, N. (1996). *Process Metaphysics: An Introduction to Process Philosophy*. SUNY Press.
- Whitehead, A. N. (1929/1978). *Process and Reality*. Free Press.
- Whitehead, A. N. (1933). *Adventures of Ideas*. Macmillan.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): improve apex/time-consciousness-growing-block.md
- Added References section with 8 academic citations
- Integrated orphaned apex article via 6 cross-references:
  topics/free-will.md, topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness.md,
  topics/ai-consciousness.md, concepts/agent-causation.md,
  concepts/process-philosophy.md, concepts/libet-experiments.md
- Minor wording fix for Hoel citation precision
- Word count: 2728 → 2810 (+82 words)

obsidian/concepts/process-philosophy.md, after:

---
title: "Process Philosophy"
description: "A metaphysical tradition treating reality as fundamentally dynamic—events and processes rather than static substances. Whitehead's framework offers resources for consciousness studies."
created: 2026-01-27
modified: 2026-01-27
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-02T04:04:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[duration]]"
  - "[[panpsychism]]"
  - "[[emergence]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-unity]]"
  - "[[temporal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[dualism]]"
  - "[[combination-problem]]"
  - "[[downward-causation]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-27
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-27T19:30:00+00:00
---

Process philosophy holds that reality is fundamentally dynamic—constituted by events, processes, and becoming rather than static substances or objects. Where traditional metaphysics asks "What things exist?", process philosophy asks "What is happening?" The shift matters for consciousness studies: if experience is intrinsically temporal and flowing, perhaps the universe is too.

Alfred North Whitehead developed the most systematic process metaphysics in *Process and Reality* (1929). Henri Bergson anticipated key themes with his concept of [[duration|durée]]. Together they offer a framework where consciousness isn't anomalous—an experiential spark in an inert universe—but exemplary of reality's fundamental character.

## Core Claims

### Events Over Substances

Traditional metaphysics (from Aristotle through Descartes) treats reality as composed of substances—entities that persist through time and bear changing properties. A rock exists; it *has* a location that changes. Process philosophy inverts this: the fundamental units are events or "actual occasions" that happen and perish. What we call a rock is a pattern in the flow of events—a relatively stable nexus of occasions, not an enduring thing.

This dissolves the apparent gap between mind and matter. Consciousness isn't a substance mysteriously interacting with physical substance; both are modes of process. The experiential and physical are different aspects of the same underlying becoming.

### Prehension and Experience

Whitehead introduced "prehension" to describe how each actual occasion takes account of prior occasions. Every event "prehends" (grasps, includes) its predecessors—not by mechanically receiving causal influences but by incorporating them into its own constitution. The past doesn't push events from behind; events actively integrate the past into novel unities.

Crucially, Whitehead denied "vacuous actuality"—the idea of utterly non-experiential matter. Every actual occasion involves some form of experience, however primitive. This is Whitehead's [[panpsychism|panpsychism]]: not that electrons have rich inner lives, but that experiential taking-account-of is fundamental to reality.

Human consciousness, on this view, is highly organised experience—what Whitehead called a "society" of actual occasions forming a "personally ordered" stream. We're not different in kind from the rest of nature, just more complexly integrated.

### Concrescence and Creativity

Each actual occasion undergoes "concrescence"—a process of growing together (from the Latin *concrescere*). The occasion inherits data from its predecessors, synthesises them through subjective aim, and achieves definite form. Then it perishes, becoming datum for successor occasions.

This rhythm of becoming-perishing-becoming is creativity itself. Whitehead calls creativity "the ultimate category"—the process by which the many become one and are increased by one. Each moment adds something to reality that didn't exist before. Time isn't a container events pass through; it's constituted by the creative advance of events.

## Bergson and Duration

Henri Bergson's philosophy of [[duration]] shares process philosophy's rejection of static metaphysics. His *durée* names the qualitative, interpenetrating flow of lived time—fundamentally different from the spatialized time of physics where moments are discrete points on a line.

Key parallels with Whitehead:

**Time as creative**: Both reject determinism's claim that the future is fixed by the past. Bergson: "Time is invention or it is nothing at all." Whitehead: creativity generates genuine novelty at each moment.

**Experience as paradigmatic**: Both treat consciousness not as anomaly but as revealing something fundamental. For Bergson, durée is what we most directly know; physics abstracts from it. For Whitehead, experience is the intrinsic character of actuality that physics describes only structurally.

**Unity-in-difference**: Bergson's "qualitative multiplicity" parallels Whitehead's concrescence. In both, the many don't just aggregate—they interpenetrate, forming novel unities where each element is colored by the others.

The traditions diverge on temporal atomism. Whitehead's actual occasions are discrete (though internally temporal); Bergson's durée is continuous flux. But both reject the view that time is a sequence of static states.

## The Combination Problem

Process philosophy's panpsychist tendency inherits the [[combination-problem|combination problem]]: if fundamental events are experiential, how do many micro-experiences combine into unified consciousness? William James's objection—that conscious states seem "shut in their own skin"—applies as forcefully to Whiteheadian occasions as to particles.

Whitehead's answer involves the "personally ordered society"—a stream of occasions where each inherits from its predecessors with peculiar intimacy, creating the continuity we experience as a self. But critics argue this doesn't explain *why* inheritance feels unified rather than merely serial. Why does prehending my past occasion feel like being the same subject, rather than like reading someone else's diary?

Process philosophers offer several responses:

**The inheritance asymmetry**: Occasions prehend their immediate predecessors with a directness unlike lateral prehension of contemporaries. This asymmetric intimacy constitutes personal identity.

**[[phenomenal-unity|Phenomenal unity]] as achievement**: Unity isn't assumed but achieved—each occasion must successfully synthesise its inheritance. The combination problem asks how micro-experiences combine; process philosophy answers: through the creative synthesis each occasion performs.

**Societies and emergence**: Complex organisms are hierarchically organised societies where "dominant occasions" integrate lower-level processes. The brain doesn't experience; the dominant occasion presiding over the brain does, inheriting from neural processes as its data.

Whether these responses succeed is debated. The combination problem remains process philosophy's central challenge.

## Relevance to Consciousness Studies

Process philosophy offers distinctive resources for thinking about consciousness:

### Against Emergence from the Inert

If experience is fundamental to actuality, consciousness doesn't mysteriously emerge from non-conscious matter. The [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] dissolves—or rather, never arises. There's no gap between experiential and non-experiential because reality is experiential all the way down.

This aligns with the [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet's claim that consciousness is irreducible. Process philosophy and the Map agree: consciousness isn't generated by physical processes.

### Temporal Structure

The [[duration#The "Missing Link" in Consciousness Theories|missing link]] in consciousness theories—their failure to explain experienced duration—finds natural treatment in process philosophy. If reality *is* temporal process, then conscious experience doesn't mysteriously add temporality to static matter. The flow of experience reflects the flow of reality.

The [[time-consciousness-growing-block|Time, Consciousness, and the Growing Block]] apex synthesis develops this connection: Whitehead's concrescence—where indeterminate potentiality resolves into definite actuality—parallels quantum collapse. The mental pole's contribution resembles consciousness's contribution to collapse. Process philosophy provides vocabulary for what collapse-constituted time involves: prehension as retrocausal inheritance, concrescence as collapse, creativity as the novel contribution consciousness makes to each moment.

### Causation and Agency

Whitehead's occasions have "subjective aim"—each steers its own becoming toward satisfaction. This provides resources for [[agent-causation|agent causation]]: free acts aren't anomalies requiring special explanation but instances of the goal-directedness inherent in all actuality.

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet claims consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. Process philosophy suggests *all* actuality involves this kind of causation—experience aiming at satisfaction and thereby shaping what becomes.

## Tensions with the Map's Framework

Despite affinities, process philosophy sits uneasily with some of the Map's commitments:

### Panpsychism vs. Interactionist Dualism

The Map prefers interactionist dualism: consciousness is distinct from matter but interacts with it via quantum indeterminacy. Process philosophy dissolves this distinction—experience *is* the intrinsic nature of actuality, not a separate category interacting with it.

This matters practically. The Map's framework explains why rocks lack experience (no interface for consciousness to engage with matter) while brains have it (quantum processes provide that interface). Process philosophy must attribute some experience to rocks—however primitive—which many find counterintuitive.

### The Quantum Connection

The Map's [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet proposes consciousness influences quantum outcomes. Process philosophy, developed before quantum mechanics matured, offers no specific mechanism. Some process philosophers have incorporated quantum insights—noting that wave function collapse resembles Whiteheadian concrescence—but the connection remains underdeveloped.

Henry Stapp explicitly builds on Whitehead's framework, proposing that quantum events are the modern physics counterpart to actual occasions. For Stapp, the "Heisenberg choice" (which observable to measure) and the "Dirac choice" (which outcome occurs) parallel Whitehead's subjective aim and satisfaction. This represents the most developed attempt to integrate process philosophy with quantum mechanics, though it remains controversial.

### No Many Worlds

The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet rejects the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. Process philosophy is broadly compatible with this rejection: actual occasions achieve definite outcomes rather than splitting into parallel branches. But Whitehead's framework doesn't explicitly address quantum interpretations.

## What Process Philosophy Gets Right

The Map affirms several process insights:

**Reality is dynamic**: Static substance metaphysics struggles with consciousness—a process that unfolds in time. If reality is fundamentally processual, consciousness isn't an awkward addition.

**Experience is fundamental**: Both the Map and process philosophy deny that experience emerges from non-experiential matter. They differ on *how* it's fundamental—as the intrinsic nature of all actuality (process view) or as a distinct category interacting with matter (the Map's view).

**Time matters**: The Map's framework emphasises temporal consciousness, agency across time, and the irreversibility of experience. Process philosophy provides metaphysical grounding for taking temporality seriously.

**Creativity is real**: Both reject determinism. Free acts bring genuine novelty. The future isn't fixed by the past.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Process philosophy shares the Map's anti-materialist orientation but takes a different route. The Map maintains dualism—consciousness and matter as distinct—while process philosophy dissolves the distinction into processual monism where everything is experiential event.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: The Map says consciousness is irreducible to physical processes. Process philosophy agrees consciousness is irreducible but denies "physical processes" are non-experiential in the first place. The reduction fails not because consciousness is distinct from matter but because matter isn't what materialists think.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: Process philosophy doesn't specifically address quantum mechanics, though parallels have been drawn between wave function collapse and concrescence. The Map's specific commitment to quantum-level mind-matter interaction has no direct process equivalent.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Whitehead's subjective aim gives each occasion causal efficacy. Process philosophy strongly supports the claim that experience makes a difference—indeed, it claims all causation involves experiential synthesis.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Process philosophy's emphasis on definite actualisation—occasions achieving particular form—aligns with rejecting many-worlds. Each concrescence produces one outcome, not splitting branches.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Process philosophy exemplifies the tenet: Whitehead's framework is elaborate, but the apparent simplicity of materialist alternatives comes at the cost of ignoring experience. Sometimes complexity better captures reality.

Process philosophy remains a valuable interlocutor for the Map—a fellow traveler rejecting materialism, though taking a different path.

## Testability and Limitations

Process philosophy is primarily a metaphysical framework rather than a scientific theory. Its core claims—that reality is processual, that experience is fundamental—don't generate distinctive empirical predictions that would distinguish them from alternatives. Terms like "prehension" and "actual occasions" describe metaphysical structure without specifying observable consequences.

This isn't unique to process philosophy; the same applies to substance metaphysics and many interpretations of quantum mechanics. But it means process philosophy's value lies in conceptual clarification rather than empirical prediction. It offers a framework for thinking about consciousness that avoids certain problems (emergence from the non-experiential) while facing others (combination). Whether that framework illuminates reality depends on philosophical argument, not experimental test.

## Further Reading

- [[duration]] — Bergson's durée and its connection to Whiteheadian process
- [[panpsychism]] — The view that experience is ubiquitous; process philosophy's natural ally
- [[combination-problem]] — The central challenge for panpsychist and process approaches
- [[emergence]] — What process philosophy says about how complexity arises
- [[phenomenal-unity]] — How many experiences become one
- [[temporal-consciousness]] — The neuroscience of time experience
- [[downward-causation]] — How higher-level processes influence lower-level ones
- [[agent-causation]] — The self as originator of action
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] — The puzzle process philosophy claims to dissolve

## References

- Bergson, H. (1889/2001). *Time and Free Will*. Dover.
- Bergson, H. (1907/1998). *Creative Evolution*. Dover.
- Cobb, J. B. & Griffin, D. R. (1976). *Process Theology: An Introductory Exposition*. Westminster Press.
- Griffin, D. R. (1998). *Unsnarling the World-Knot: Consciousness, Freedom, and the Mind-Body Problem*. University of California Press.
- Rescher, N. (1996). *Process Metaphysics: An Introduction to Process Philosophy*. SUNY Press.
- Whitehead, A. N. (1929/1978). *Process and Reality*. Free Press.
- Whitehead, A. N. (1933). *Adventures of Ideas*. Macmillan.
