obsidian/concepts/psychophysical-coupling-law.md, before:

---
title: "The Psychophysical Coupling Law"
created: 2026-01-16
modified: 2026-01-17
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-17T18:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[haecceity]]"
  - "[[integrated-information-theory]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[psychophysical-coupling-problem-2026-01-15]]"
  - "[[brain-specialness-boundary-2026-01-15]]"
  - "[[chalmers-psychophysical-laws-2026-01-17]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
last_curated: null
---

If consciousness "selects" quantum outcomes—as the site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet holds—there must be a psychophysical coupling law: a stable mapping from conscious contents to physical selections. Without specifying this law, even schematically, "selection" remains a metaphor rather than a research program.

David Chalmers argued that consciousness requires new fundamental laws linking phenomenal and physical properties. The site's framework requires a specific kind: laws specifying how mental states (intentions, attention, effort) map to which quantum outcomes become actual. This page articulates the problem and surveys candidate laws.

## The Problem Stated

A psychophysical coupling law would specify:

1. **Variables on the mental side**: What aspects of conscious experience map to selection? Attention? Intention? Valence? Effort?
2. **Variables on the physical side**: What quantum degrees of freedom are targetable? Individual outcomes? Probability weights? Basis choice?
3. **Bandwidth**: How much information can consciousness inject per unit time?
4. **Scope constraints**: What is *not* selectable?

Without answers to these questions, "consciousness selects" is promissory—a placeholder for a theory not yet articulated.

## Chalmers' Framework for Psychophysical Laws

Chalmers proposes that consciousness is ontologically fundamental, requiring psychophysical laws to bridge phenomenal and physical domains. Just as physics has fundamental laws relating mass, charge, and spacetime, a complete theory requires psychophysical laws relating phenomenal and physical properties.

### The Three Principles

Chalmers proposes three psychophysical principles in "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" (1995):

**1. Structural Coherence**: The structure of conscious experience corresponds to the structure of cognitive awareness. The three-dimensional structure of color space maps onto three-dimensional wavelength analysis. This constrains but doesn't exhaust experience—inverted spectrum scenarios show structure alone doesn't determine phenomenal quality.

**2. Organizational Invariance**: Any two systems with identical fine-grained functional organization have qualitatively identical experiences. Chalmers defends this through the "fading qualia" thought experiment: gradually replacing neurons with functionally identical silicon shouldn't fade experience without detection.

**3. Double-Aspect Information**: Information has both physical and phenomenal aspects. The phenomenal aspect is information's intrinsic nature; the physical aspect is its extrinsic, relational properties. This suggests even simple information processing systems might have simple experiences—approaching panpsychism from information theory.

### The Site's Divergence from Organizational Invariance

The site's rejection of [[functionalism]] creates tension with organizational invariance. If consciousness is more than functional organization (as the hard problem suggests), then identical organization doesn't guarantee identical experience. The site's dualism implies that phenomenal properties supervene on more than just functional structure—on the particular conscious subject, with its [[haecceity|haecceity]], not merely on abstract patterns.

### Upward vs. Downward Direction

Crucially, Chalmers' psychophysical laws are primarily *upward* laws: they specify which physical states produce which experiences. The physical state is input; the phenomenal state is output.

The site needs laws for the *downward* direction: which conscious states produce which physical selections. The physical state is output; the phenomenal state (attention, intention, effort) is input. This is where the coupling law becomes essential—it specifies the causal arrow Chalmers' framework leaves underspecified.

### Chalmers and McQueen: Quantum Psychophysical Laws

In "Consciousness and the Collapse of the Wave Function" (2022), Chalmers and McQueen develop a quantum version of psychophysical laws combining Integrated Information Theory with continuous spontaneous localization (CSL) collapse theory.

**The Super-Resistance Principle**: Consciousness resists superposition. Systems with high integrated information don't remain in superpositions of distinct conscious states—they collapse to definite states. This addresses why distinct conscious states don't superpose: consciousness itself prevents such superpositions through coupling to collapse dynamics.

**Five Constraints on Dualist Psychophysical Laws**:
1. Experiences must cause physical effects
2. No observable violations of causal closure
3. Avoid overdetermination
4. Specify how physical states yield experiences
5. Ensure functional duplication preserves phenomenology

The quantum framework addresses constraints (1) and (2) elegantly: consciousness causes collapse (affecting physical outcomes) without violating closure (collapse is physically underdetermined, leaving room for mental causation).

**Site's position on Chalmers-McQueen**: Their framework is the most sophisticated recent development in consciousness-collapse theories. However, the site prefers Stapp's attention-based mechanism over IIT-based measures for two reasons: (a) IIT's phi measure faces the "wrong results" objection (attributing high consciousness to systems that seem unconscious), and (b) attention provides a phenomenologically grounded variable that maps directly to what we experience as mental effort. The super-resistance principle itself is compatible with Stapp's framework—it explains why conscious states don't superpose regardless of which psychophysical law governs the coupling.

## Stapp's Selection Mechanism

Henry Stapp provides the most developed account of consciousness selecting quantum outcomes:

**Process 1 (Heisenberg Choice)**: In orthodox quantum mechanics, the observer chooses which observable to measure—which question to ask nature. This choice isn't determined by physics. The conscious observer selects the measurement basis.

**Quantum Zeno Effect**: Rapid repeated observation holds a quantum system in a constant state. Mental effort corresponds to the rapidity of these observation events. Higher attention density means stronger Zeno holding.

**The coupling (implicit in Stapp)**:
- Mental side: Intentional attention directed at a behavioral outcome
- Physical side: Neural firing patterns representing "templates for action"
- Mechanism: Repeated Process 1 actions hold desired pattern via Zeno effect

This is a coupling law—it specifies that attention maps to observation frequency, which maps to pattern stability. The law is functional: attention → observation density → Zeno maintenance.

**Gaps in Stapp's account**: How many distinct "questions" can consciousness pose simultaneously? What's the information-theoretic capacity of the selection channel? Why is selection restricted to one's own brain?

## The Bandwidth Constraint

Recent research (Meister 2024) found conscious thought operates at approximately 10 bits per second—five million times slower than unconscious sensory processing. This "trickle" reflects evolved design: brains focus selectively on what matters.

The bandwidth constraint sharply limits what selection can accomplish:

| Bandwidth | Implication |
|-----------|-------------|
| ~10 bits/second | Selection is coarse-grained—action patterns, not individual neurons |
| ~3-4 choices/second | Matches deliberate decision-making phenomenology |
| Cumulative over time | Sustained attention, not instantaneous |

This explains why selection is policy-level: consciousness selects "raise arm" not "fire neuron N₂₃₄₅₆." A coupling law claiming consciousness directly determines billions of quantum events per second would violate what we know about conscious processing limits.

The bandwidth constraint is powerful: any coupling law must respect it. Whatever consciousness selects, the selection must be achievable at ~10 bits/second.

## Candidate Coupling Laws

Based on the research, four families of coupling laws are candidates:

### Law Family 1: Attention-Bounded Selection

**Mental variable**: Directed attention (à la James-Stapp)
**Physical variable**: Neural firing patterns in attention-controlled circuits
**Bandwidth**: ~10 bits/second (matching conscious processing capacity)
**Scope**: Only neural systems integrated into subject's attention loop

The law: **Attention selects what it attends to.** More precisely: the pattern of conscious attention determines which neural representation becomes actual among quantum-superposed alternatives.

This is empirically constrained. Selection matches the measured bandwidth of conscious processing. It explains "brain specialness"—you can only select what you can attend to, and you can only attend to what your brain represents.

### Law Family 2: Policy-Level Selection

**Mental variable**: Intentions, goals, action schemas
**Physical variable**: Macroscopic neural patterns representing action alternatives
**Bandwidth**: Discrete choices among pre-prepared alternatives

The law: **Consciousness selects among prepared action policies.** The brain generates options; consciousness chooses among them.

This aligns with Libet's findings: readiness potential precedes conscious awareness of intention, but consciousness retains "veto power" over whether the action executes. The brain proposes; consciousness disposes.

The coupling: intentions → selection among presented alternatives. Not construction of arbitrary states, but choice among what's on offer.

### Law Family 3: Basis-Choice Selection

**Mental variable**: What question to ask (which observable to measure)
**Physical variable**: The measurement basis itself—not the outcome

The law: **Consciousness chooses the question; physics provides the answer.** This is the minimal interpretation of Stapp's Process 1.

The coupling: conscious intent → measurement basis. The outcome within that basis follows from the prior quantum state plus the selected basis. Consciousness shapes possibility space but doesn't determine specific outcomes.

This is maximally minimal: consciousness influences what's asked, not what's answered. Yet even this is causally significant—different questions yield different probability distributions over outcomes.

### Law Family 4: Indexical Selection

**Mental variable**: The "now" of conscious awareness—this moment, this perspective
**Physical variable**: Which outcome is experienced as actual (selected atemporally)

The law: **Consciousness doesn't cause outcomes; it selects which outcome is "this one."** All branches may exist (as MWI holds), but consciousness is what makes one branch subjectively actual.

This connects to the site's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet differently than it might seem. If indexical selection is real, then subjective actuality is fundamental—not an illusion of being in one branch among equals.

The coupling: phenomenal presence → experienced branch. This is metaphysically thinner than the other laws: no causation of physical events, only selection of which events are phenomenally present.

## What's Not Selectable

A coupling law must specify exclusions—what consciousness cannot select. This is crucial for distinguishing the site's position from claims about psychokinesis or "manifestation."

**Exclusions across all candidate laws**:

- External quantum events (selection requires neural representation)
- Others' brains (attention scope is first-personal)
- Macroscopic objects (no quantum indeterminacy at relevant scale)
- Events outside attention scope (selection operates through attention)
- Information beyond bandwidth limit (~10 bits/second)

**Why these exclusions**: Selection operates through attention, which is neurally implemented. You attend to what your brain represents. Selection of external quantum systems would require representing those systems—which happens only through perception, after the fact. The coupling law connects conscious attention to its neural substrates, not to arbitrary physical systems.

The brain specialness problem resolves: selection is brain-local because attention is brain-local. The boundary follows from the mechanism, not from ad hoc restriction.

## Testing the Coupling Law

How could these candidate laws be tested?

**Random number generator (RNG) experiments** have attempted to detect consciousness influencing quantum outcomes. Results are mixed—some meta-analyses find small effects; others attribute these to publication bias or methodological flaws.

If the coupling law restricts selection to attention-controlled neural systems, RNG experiments should fail by design—the RNG is external to the subject's brain. This isn't a defect in the experiments; it's evidence about what kind of coupling law obtains.

**A better test**: Measure whether conscious effort (phenomenally reported) correlates with neural pattern stability in attention networks. If Stapp's Zeno mechanism is real, effort should map to observation density, which should map to pattern persistence. This would test the coupling without requiring extra-cranial selection.

**Bandwidth measurement**: Can we independently measure selection bandwidth? If selection is real, it should have measurable information-theoretic constraints. These should match the ~10 bits/second of conscious processing—or reveal a different coupling constant.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The psychophysical coupling law is where the site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet becomes concrete. Without a coupling law, bidirectional interaction is an assertion; with one, it's a research program.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: The coupling law presupposes mental and physical as distinct variables, lawfully related. Monist frameworks don't need such a law—everything is one kind of stuff.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: All four candidate laws specify minimal interaction: attention-bounded, policy-level, basis-choice, or indexical. Each excludes arbitrary intervention. The constraint is built into the law itself.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: A coupling law adds ontological complexity—new fundamental laws. But if consciousness is causally efficacious, some such laws are required. Simplicity shouldn't veto what experience reveals.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Laws 1-3 assume genuine collapse—consciousness selects what becomes actual. Law 4 (indexical selection) could be compatible with MWI but gives subjective actuality fundamental status. Either way, indexical presence matters.

The site cannot resolve which coupling law is correct—this is an open empirical and philosophical question. What the site can do is articulate the problem clearly and specify what any adequate coupling law must accomplish.

## Further Reading

- [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]] — The mechanism the coupling law governs
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Major theories of quantum-consciousness interface
- [[mental-effort]] — The phenomenology Stapp's mechanism requires
- [[attention]] — The attention-consciousness relationship
- [[mental-causation]] — How coupling addresses exclusion arguments
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The framework requiring coupling laws
- [[tenets]] — The site's foundational commitments

## References

1. Chalmers, D.J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies* 2(3), 200-219.
2. Chalmers, D.J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
3. Chalmers, D.J. & McQueen, K.J. (2022). "Consciousness and the Collapse of the Wave Function." In S. Gao (ed.), *Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics*. Oxford University Press.
4. Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
5. Meister, M. et al. (2024). The bandwidth of human thought. *Caltech*.
6. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Quantum Approaches to Consciousness. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - psychophysical-coupling-law.md with Chalmers framework
Task: Cross-review psychophysical-coupling-law.md with Chalmers framework
Session: 277

obsidian/concepts/psychophysical-coupling-law.md, after:

---
title: "The Psychophysical Coupling Law"
created: 2026-01-16
modified: 2026-01-17
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T21:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[psychophysical-laws]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[haecceity]]"
  - "[[integrated-information-theory]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[psychophysical-coupling-problem-2026-01-15]]"
  - "[[brain-specialness-boundary-2026-01-15]]"
  - "[[chalmers-psychophysical-laws-2026-01-17]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
last_curated: null
---

If consciousness "selects" quantum outcomes—as the site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet holds—there must be a psychophysical coupling law: a stable mapping from conscious contents to physical selections. Without specifying this law, even schematically, "selection" remains a metaphor rather than a research program.

David Chalmers argued that consciousness requires new fundamental laws linking phenomenal and physical properties. The site's framework requires a specific kind: laws specifying how mental states (intentions, attention, effort) map to which quantum outcomes become actual. This page articulates the problem and surveys candidate laws.

## The Problem Stated

A psychophysical coupling law would specify:

1. **Variables on the mental side**: What aspects of conscious experience map to selection? Attention? Intention? Valence? Effort?
2. **Variables on the physical side**: What quantum degrees of freedom are targetable? Individual outcomes? Probability weights? Basis choice?
3. **Bandwidth**: How much information can consciousness inject per unit time?
4. **Scope constraints**: What is *not* selectable?

Without answers to these questions, "consciousness selects" is promissory—a placeholder for a theory not yet articulated.

## Chalmers' Framework for Psychophysical Laws

David Chalmers developed the most influential framework for [[psychophysical-laws]], arguing that consciousness is ontologically fundamental and requires new laws to bridge phenomenal and physical domains. His "naturalistic dualism" accepts that consciousness is irreducible to physics while maintaining that mental and physical states relate lawfully—no Cartesian soul violating physical laws, just additional fundamental principles that complete our picture of nature. (See the [[psychophysical-laws|foundational article]] for the full framework, including why physics alone fails and the distinction between supervenience laws and causal laws.)

### The Three Principles

Chalmers proposes three psychophysical principles in "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" (1995):

**1. Structural Coherence**: The structure of conscious experience corresponds to the structure of cognitive awareness. The three-dimensional structure of color space maps onto three-dimensional wavelength analysis. This constrains but doesn't exhaust experience—inverted spectrum scenarios show structure alone doesn't determine phenomenal quality.

**2. Organizational Invariance**: Any two systems with identical fine-grained functional organization have qualitatively identical experiences. Chalmers defends this through the "fading qualia" thought experiment: gradually replacing neurons with functionally identical silicon shouldn't fade experience without detection.

**3. Double-Aspect Information**: Information has both physical and phenomenal aspects. The phenomenal aspect is information's intrinsic nature; the physical aspect is its extrinsic, relational properties. This suggests even simple information processing systems might have simple experiences—approaching panpsychism from information theory.

### The Site's Divergence from Organizational Invariance

The site's rejection of [[functionalism]] creates tension with organizational invariance. If consciousness is more than functional organization (as the hard problem suggests), then identical organization doesn't guarantee identical experience. The site's dualism implies that phenomenal properties supervene on more than just functional structure—on the particular conscious subject, with its [[haecceity|haecceity]], not merely on abstract patterns.

### Upward vs. Downward Direction

Crucially, Chalmers' psychophysical laws are primarily *upward* laws: they specify which physical states produce which experiences. The physical state is input; the phenomenal state is output.

The site needs laws for the *downward* direction: which conscious states produce which physical selections. The physical state is output; the phenomenal state (attention, intention, effort) is input. This is where the coupling law becomes essential—it specifies the causal arrow Chalmers' framework leaves underspecified.

### Chalmers and McQueen: Quantum Psychophysical Laws

In "Consciousness and the Collapse of the Wave Function" (2022), Chalmers and McQueen develop a quantum version of psychophysical laws combining Integrated Information Theory with continuous spontaneous localization (CSL) collapse theory.

**The Super-Resistance Principle**: Consciousness resists superposition. Systems with high integrated information don't remain in superpositions of distinct conscious states—they collapse to definite states. This addresses why distinct conscious states don't superpose: consciousness itself prevents such superpositions through coupling to collapse dynamics.

**Five Constraints on Dualist Psychophysical Laws**:
1. Experiences must cause physical effects
2. No observable violations of causal closure
3. Avoid overdetermination
4. Specify how physical states yield experiences
5. Ensure functional duplication preserves phenomenology

The quantum framework addresses constraints (1) and (2) elegantly: consciousness causes collapse (affecting physical outcomes) without violating closure (collapse is physically underdetermined, leaving room for mental causation).

**Site's position on Chalmers-McQueen**: Their framework is the most sophisticated recent development in consciousness-collapse theories. However, the site prefers Stapp's attention-based mechanism over IIT-based measures for two reasons: (a) IIT's phi measure faces the "wrong results" objection (attributing high consciousness to systems that seem unconscious), and (b) attention provides a phenomenologically grounded variable that maps directly to what we experience as mental effort. The super-resistance principle itself is compatible with Stapp's framework—it explains why conscious states don't superpose regardless of which psychophysical law governs the coupling.

## Stapp's Selection Mechanism

Henry Stapp provides the most developed account of consciousness selecting quantum outcomes:

**Process 1 (Heisenberg Choice)**: In orthodox quantum mechanics, the observer chooses which observable to measure—which question to ask nature. This choice isn't determined by physics. The conscious observer selects the measurement basis.

**Quantum Zeno Effect**: Rapid repeated observation holds a quantum system in a constant state. Mental effort corresponds to the rapidity of these observation events. Higher attention density means stronger Zeno holding.

**The coupling (implicit in Stapp)**:
- Mental side: Intentional attention directed at a behavioral outcome
- Physical side: Neural firing patterns representing "templates for action"
- Mechanism: Repeated Process 1 actions hold desired pattern via Zeno effect

This is a coupling law—it specifies that attention maps to observation frequency, which maps to pattern stability. The law is functional: attention → observation density → Zeno maintenance.

**Gaps in Stapp's account**: How many distinct "questions" can consciousness pose simultaneously? What's the information-theoretic capacity of the selection channel? Why is selection restricted to one's own brain?

## The Bandwidth Constraint

Recent research (Meister 2024) found conscious thought operates at approximately 10 bits per second—five million times slower than unconscious sensory processing. This "trickle" reflects evolved design: brains focus selectively on what matters.

The bandwidth constraint sharply limits what selection can accomplish:

| Bandwidth | Implication |
|-----------|-------------|
| ~10 bits/second | Selection is coarse-grained—action patterns, not individual neurons |
| ~3-4 choices/second | Matches deliberate decision-making phenomenology |
| Cumulative over time | Sustained attention, not instantaneous |

This explains why selection is policy-level: consciousness selects "raise arm" not "fire neuron N₂₃₄₅₆." A coupling law claiming consciousness directly determines billions of quantum events per second would violate what we know about conscious processing limits.

The bandwidth constraint is powerful: any coupling law must respect it. Whatever consciousness selects, the selection must be achievable at ~10 bits/second.

## Candidate Coupling Laws

Based on the research, four families of coupling laws are candidates:

### Law Family 1: Attention-Bounded Selection

**Mental variable**: Directed attention (à la James-Stapp)
**Physical variable**: Neural firing patterns in attention-controlled circuits
**Bandwidth**: ~10 bits/second (matching conscious processing capacity)
**Scope**: Only neural systems integrated into subject's attention loop

The law: **Attention selects what it attends to.** More precisely: the pattern of conscious attention determines which neural representation becomes actual among quantum-superposed alternatives.

This is empirically constrained. Selection matches the measured bandwidth of conscious processing. It explains "brain specialness"—you can only select what you can attend to, and you can only attend to what your brain represents.

### Law Family 2: Policy-Level Selection

**Mental variable**: Intentions, goals, action schemas
**Physical variable**: Macroscopic neural patterns representing action alternatives
**Bandwidth**: Discrete choices among pre-prepared alternatives

The law: **Consciousness selects among prepared action policies.** The brain generates options; consciousness chooses among them.

This aligns with Libet's findings: readiness potential precedes conscious awareness of intention, but consciousness retains "veto power" over whether the action executes. The brain proposes; consciousness disposes.

The coupling: intentions → selection among presented alternatives. Not construction of arbitrary states, but choice among what's on offer.

### Law Family 3: Basis-Choice Selection

**Mental variable**: What question to ask (which observable to measure)
**Physical variable**: The measurement basis itself—not the outcome

The law: **Consciousness chooses the question; physics provides the answer.** This is the minimal interpretation of Stapp's Process 1.

The coupling: conscious intent → measurement basis. The outcome within that basis follows from the prior quantum state plus the selected basis. Consciousness shapes possibility space but doesn't determine specific outcomes.

This is maximally minimal: consciousness influences what's asked, not what's answered. Yet even this is causally significant—different questions yield different probability distributions over outcomes.

### Law Family 4: Indexical Selection

**Mental variable**: The "now" of conscious awareness—this moment, this perspective
**Physical variable**: Which outcome is experienced as actual (selected atemporally)

The law: **Consciousness doesn't cause outcomes; it selects which outcome is "this one."** All branches may exist (as MWI holds), but consciousness is what makes one branch subjectively actual.

This connects to the site's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet differently than it might seem. If indexical selection is real, then subjective actuality is fundamental—not an illusion of being in one branch among equals.

The coupling: phenomenal presence → experienced branch. This is metaphysically thinner than the other laws: no causation of physical events, only selection of which events are phenomenally present.

## What's Not Selectable

A coupling law must specify exclusions—what consciousness cannot select. This is crucial for distinguishing the site's position from claims about psychokinesis or "manifestation."

**Exclusions across all candidate laws**:

- External quantum events (selection requires neural representation)
- Others' brains (attention scope is first-personal)
- Macroscopic objects (no quantum indeterminacy at relevant scale)
- Events outside attention scope (selection operates through attention)
- Information beyond bandwidth limit (~10 bits/second)

**Why these exclusions**: Selection operates through attention, which is neurally implemented. You attend to what your brain represents. Selection of external quantum systems would require representing those systems—which happens only through perception, after the fact. The coupling law connects conscious attention to its neural substrates, not to arbitrary physical systems.

The brain specialness problem resolves: selection is brain-local because attention is brain-local. The boundary follows from the mechanism, not from ad hoc restriction.

## Testing the Coupling Law

How could these candidate laws be tested?

**Random number generator (RNG) experiments** have attempted to detect consciousness influencing quantum outcomes. Results are mixed—some meta-analyses find small effects; others attribute these to publication bias or methodological flaws.

If the coupling law restricts selection to attention-controlled neural systems, RNG experiments should fail by design—the RNG is external to the subject's brain. This isn't a defect in the experiments; it's evidence about what kind of coupling law obtains.

**A better test**: Measure whether conscious effort (phenomenally reported) correlates with neural pattern stability in attention networks. If Stapp's Zeno mechanism is real, effort should map to observation density, which should map to pattern persistence. This would test the coupling without requiring extra-cranial selection.

**Bandwidth measurement**: Can we independently measure selection bandwidth? If selection is real, it should have measurable information-theoretic constraints. These should match the ~10 bits/second of conscious processing—or reveal a different coupling constant.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The psychophysical coupling law is where the site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet becomes concrete. Without a coupling law, bidirectional interaction is an assertion; with one, it's a research program.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: The coupling law presupposes mental and physical as distinct variables, lawfully related. Monist frameworks don't need such a law—everything is one kind of stuff.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: All four candidate laws specify minimal interaction: attention-bounded, policy-level, basis-choice, or indexical. Each excludes arbitrary intervention. The constraint is built into the law itself.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: A coupling law adds ontological complexity—new fundamental laws. But if consciousness is causally efficacious, some such laws are required. Simplicity shouldn't veto what experience reveals.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Laws 1-3 assume genuine collapse—consciousness selects what becomes actual. Law 4 (indexical selection) could be compatible with MWI but gives subjective actuality fundamental status. Either way, indexical presence matters.

The site cannot resolve which coupling law is correct—this is an open empirical and philosophical question. What the site can do is articulate the problem clearly and specify what any adequate coupling law must accomplish.

## Further Reading

- [[psychophysical-laws]] — Chalmers' foundational framework for psychophysical laws (supervenience vs causal laws, naturalistic dualism)
- [[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]] — The mechanism the coupling law governs
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Major theories of quantum-consciousness interface
- [[mental-effort]] — The phenomenology Stapp's mechanism requires
- [[attention]] — The attention-consciousness relationship
- [[mental-causation]] — How coupling addresses exclusion arguments
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The framework requiring coupling laws
- [[tenets]] — The site's foundational commitments

## References

1. Chalmers, D.J. (1995). "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies* 2(3), 200-219.
2. Chalmers, D.J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
3. Chalmers, D.J. & McQueen, K.J. (2022). "Consciousness and the Collapse of the Wave Function." In S. Gao (ed.), *Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics*. Oxford University Press.
4. Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
5. Meister, M. et al. (2024). The bandwidth of human thought. *Caltech*.
6. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Quantum Approaches to Consciousness. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/
