obsidian/concepts/retrocausality.md, before:

---
title: "Retrocausality"
created: 2026-01-07
modified: 2026-01-07
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T12:15:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[locality]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[libet-experiments]]"
  - "[[collapse-and-time]]"
  - "[[philosophy-of-time]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[libet-experiments-free-will-2026-01-07]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
---

Retrocausality is the hypothesis that causation can operate backward in time—that future events can influence past ones. In the context of consciousness, retrocausality offers a resolution to the apparent problem of neural activity preceding conscious awareness: if consciousness can influence outcomes retrocausally, the temporal ordering of brain events poses no obstacle to genuine mental causation.

This concept matters for the site's framework because the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences the physical world. Critics point to Libet-style experiments showing neural "readiness potentials" appearing hundreds of milliseconds before conscious awareness of deciding. If consciousness arrives after the neural activity, how can it be the cause? Retrocausality dissolves this objection.

## The Puzzle of Temporal Ordering

[[libet-experiments|Benjamin Libet's experiments]] (1983) and subsequent studies by Soon et al. (2008) revealed that brain activity predictive of a decision can occur before a person becomes aware of deciding. The readiness potential appears ~350ms before conscious awareness; fMRI studies extended this to seconds. Importantly, Schurger et al. (2012) challenged the standard interpretation, arguing the readiness potential may be neural noise rather than decision preparation—but even if this critique succeeds, retrocausality offers a more fundamental resolution.

This seems to pose a problem: if the neural activity comes first, isn't consciousness merely informed of decisions already made? Doesn't this reduce consciousness to an epiphenomenon—a passenger rather than a driver?

The retrocausal response: temporal precedence does not establish causal priority. If effects can precede causes, then consciousness occurring "after" neural activity is no obstacle to consciousness being the cause.

## Retrocausality in Physics

Retrocausality isn't philosophical speculation divorced from physics—it has serious proponents and empirical grounding.

### Time-Symmetric Quantum Mechanics

The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics are time-symmetric: they work equally well run forward or backward. The apparent "arrow of time" in quantum measurement is an addition to the formalism, not derivable from it. Philosophers like Huw Price argue that if physics is time-symmetric and causal, retrocausality follows necessarily.

This connects to the deeper question of [[collapse-and-time|collapse and temporal asymmetry]]. Multiple arrows of time have been identified—thermodynamic, cosmological, electromagnetic, psychological—but whether quantum measurement introduces an independent arrow remains contested. If collapse is real and genuinely irreversible, consciousness's participation in collapse links it to the structure of time itself, not merely to events occurring within time.

### Wheeler's Delayed-Choice Experiment

John Wheeler proposed (and subsequent experiments confirmed) that a measurement choice made *after* a particle has passed through a double-slit apparatus can determine whether the particle behaved as a wave or particle *earlier*. In the standard interpretation, this reflects quantum superposition persisting until measurement. In the retrocausal interpretation, the later measurement genuinely influences the earlier behaviour.

The 2017 satellite experiment extended delayed-choice over distances of thousands of kilometres, confirming the effect at cosmic scales.

### The Transactional Interpretation

John Cramer's transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics (1986) makes retrocausality explicit. Quantum events involve:

1. **Offer waves** propagating forward in time from the emitter
2. **Confirmation waves** propagating backward in time from the absorber
3. A **handshake** between future and past that creates the transaction

In this picture, the wave function is physically real, not merely a calculation tool. Transactions are "atemporal"—the collapse occurs along the entire transaction simultaneously, with no privileged temporal direction. The Born Rule (probability = amplitude squared) emerges naturally from the handshake.

### Bell Tests and Nonlocality

Bell test experiments demonstrate correlations between entangled particles that cannot be explained by local hidden variables. The standard response invokes nonlocality: influences propagating faster than light. But retrocausal models offer an alternative: the correlations arise because later measurements retroactively influence earlier states. This preserves locality at the cost of temporal direction.

## Application to Consciousness

How does retrocausality help with consciousness and the Libet problem?

### The Site's Framework

The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] proposes that consciousness influences the physical world at the quantum level—biasing otherwise indeterminate outcomes. The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness selects among superposed neural states.

If this selection operates retrocausally, then:

1. The brain prepares multiple possible action patterns (superposition)
2. Neural activity builds up, reflecting all possibilities
3. Consciousness "selects" which pattern becomes actual
4. This selection propagates backward, determining which neural history becomes real
5. What appears as neural activity "predicting" the decision is actually the selected history

The readiness potential doesn't precede conscious choice in any causally significant sense—it's part of the package that consciousness selected, including its temporal ordering.

The [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will|systematic treatment of quantum indeterminacy and free will]] develops this framework in detail, showing how retrocausality dissolves the temporal ordering problem within the broader context of the [[luck-objection|luck objection]] response. Consciousness doesn't merely select an outcome—it selects the entire temporal sequence, including the neural preparation that appears to "precede" awareness. This transforms what looks like deterministic prediction into selected history.

### The Atemporal Selection Model

Cramer's transactional interpretation suggests that quantum transactions are fundamentally atemporal. If consciousness operates at this level, then conscious selection might also be atemporal—not occurring at a moment in linear time but determining which moments become actual.

In this picture, asking "when does consciousness make the decision?" may be the wrong question. The decision isn't made *at* a time; it determines *which* times (and their contents) become real. As explored in [[collapse-and-time]], this has profound implications: consciousness wouldn't merely experience time's flow but would help constitute temporal structure through the pattern of selections it makes across transactions.

### Addressing Objections

**Objection**: If consciousness can affect the past, why can't we change history?

**Response**: Retrocausality doesn't imply we can alter established facts. The handshake between future and past creates a consistent transaction. There's no alternate timeline where things went differently—the retrocausal influence is part of how the one real history came to be.

**Objection**: Isn't this unfalsifiable?

**Response**: Retrocausal interpretations make the same predictions as standard quantum mechanics for all currently testable scenarios. This isn't a weakness unique to retrocausality—all quantum interpretations (Copenhagen, Many-Worlds, Bohmian) share this feature. The question is which interpretation makes best sense of what we observe.

**Objection**: Why should consciousness specifically have retrocausal powers?

**Response**: The claim isn't that consciousness *adds* retrocausal powers to physics but that physics already includes retrocausality, and consciousness operates at the level where this matters. If consciousness interacts with quantum processes (per the site's tenets), it inherits the temporal properties of those processes.

## Connection to Quantum Consciousness Mechanisms

Retrocausality complements the specific [[quantum-consciousness|quantum consciousness mechanisms]] proposed by researchers like Penrose-Hameroff (Orch OR) and Henry Stapp. These mechanisms explain *where* in the brain consciousness might interface with quantum processes; retrocausality explains *how* the temporal ordering puzzle dissolves.

**Orch OR and retrocausality**: Penrose and Hameroff propose that consciousness emerges through quantum collapse events in neuronal microtubules. If these collapses have retrocausal aspects (as the transactional interpretation suggests), then the "moment" of consciousness selecting a particular collapse outcome need not precede the neural activity it shapes. The collapse event and its preparation form an atemporal transaction.

**Stapp's quantum Zeno and retrocausality**: Stapp's model proposes that conscious attention acts like repeated quantum observations, stabilizing desired neural patterns. Combined with retrocausality, this suggests attention might work through retrocausal handshakes—the later "observation" events retroactively constraining which neural patterns were ever available. The Zeno freezing operates across time, not merely within it.

Both approaches benefit from retrocausality because it dissolves the Libet objection without requiring consciousness to somehow "speed up" to precede neural preparation.

### Motor Selection: Independent Corroboration

The retrocausal framework gains support from [[motor-selection|motor control research]]. Willed movement shows the same neural signatures as willed attention—frontal theta oscillations, ~300ms deployment time, distinct willed vs instructed signatures. If retrocausal selection operated only in attention, skeptics might dismiss it as interpretation-dependent. But two independent domains showing identical selection architecture suggests the framework captures something real.

Importantly, the Libet challenge to motor control has weakened substantially. Sjöberg (2024) demonstrated that surgical resection of the supplementary motor area—where the readiness potential is generated—doesn't impair voluntary action. Desmurget's double dissociation separates intention (parietal) from execution (premotor). The readiness potential may be preparation for execution, not the decision itself. Retrocausality explains why: consciousness selected the complete motor sequence, including its temporal preparation.

## Time Ontology and Retrocausality

Retrocausality raises a puzzle about the [[philosophy-of-time|ontology of time]]. The transactional interpretation requires confirmation waves propagating *from* the future—but if the future doesn't exist yet (presentism), what sends these waves? This seems to favor eternalism: all times exist equally, so the future is "there" to participate in transactions.

Yet the site's framework requires real collapse—which introduces genuine temporal asymmetry, favoring A-theory (real temporal becoming) over pure B-theory eternalism where time's flow is illusory.

The site's [[time-collapse-and-agency|temporal framework]] proposes a resolution: a **modified growing block** where:

1. Retrocausality operates within the time-symmetric physics *before* collapse establishes temporal direction
2. Collapse—including consciousness-involving collapse—creates irreversible temporal structure
3. After collapse, the selected history is simply the history (amenable to B-theoretic description)
4. The "future" that participates in retrocausal transactions is the space of quantum possibilities, not ontologically existing future facts

On this view, retrocausality doesn't require eternalism in the strong sense. What it requires is that quantum processes involve boundary conditions at both ends of a transaction—but these boundary conditions can be superposed possibilities rather than determinate futures. The handshake between offer and confirmation waves selects which possibilities become actual, growing the block.

This preserves the key insight: the future is genuinely open (not already existing), yet retrocausal physics can operate because superposed possibilities extend forward. Collapse—including consciousness-mediated selection—determines which possibilities resolve into the single actual history.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Retrocausality offers the strongest available resolution to the temporal ordering objection against conscious causation. If the [[tenets|site's tenets]] are correct—if consciousness genuinely influences which quantum outcomes become actual—then retrocausal models provide the mechanism for how this influence can appear "after" the neural activity it shapes.

This doesn't prove the tenets are correct. It shows that a coherent physical picture exists in which:
- Consciousness causally influences the brain
- Neural activity can precede conscious awareness
- These two facts are fully compatible

The Libet experiments don't refute conscious causation; they reveal that conscious causation may operate outside the linear temporal order we normally assume.

## Further Reading

- [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]] — Systematic treatment of how quantum indeterminacy supports libertarian free will, including the retrocausal resolution
- [[motor-selection]] — Motor control as a second selection domain showing identical architecture
- [[philosophy-of-time]] — McTaggart's A/B series, presentism vs eternalism, and how the site reconciles these with retrocausality
- [[collapse-and-time]] — How collapse introduces temporal asymmetry and why consciousness may be constitutive of time's arrow
- [[time-collapse-and-agency]] — The site's full treatment of time, collapse, and conscious agency
- [[libet-experiments]] — Detailed treatment of Libet's experiments, Schurger's neural noise critique, and the retrocausal resolution
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Specific quantum mechanisms (Orch OR, Stapp's Zeno) that retrocausality complements
- [[luck-objection]] — Why consciousness-selected outcomes differ from lucky random events
- [[tenets]] — The site's foundational commitments, especially Bidirectional Interaction and Minimal Quantum Interaction
- [[locality]] — Related concept on how non-local effects work without violating causality
- [[libet-experiments-free-will-2026-01-07|Libet Research Notes]] — Original research notes

## References

- Cramer, J. G. (1986). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 58(3), 647.
- Price, H. (2012). Does time-symmetry imply retrocausality? *Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B*, 43(2), 75-83.
- Wheeler, J. A. (1978). The "past" and the "delayed-choice" double-slit experiment. In *Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory* (pp. 9-48). Academic Press.
- Libet, B. et al. (1983). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity. *Brain*, 106(3), 623-642.
- Leifer, M. S., & Spekkens, R. W. (2013). Towards a formulation of quantum theory as a causally neutral theory of Bayesian inference. *Physical Review A*, 88(5), 052130.

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

obsidian/concepts/retrocausality.md, after:

---
title: "Retrocausality"
created: 2026-01-07
modified: 2026-01-07
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-19T12:15:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[locality]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[libet-experiments]]"
  - "[[collapse-and-time]]"
  - "[[philosophy-of-time]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[libet-experiments-free-will-2026-01-07]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-07
last_curated: null
---

Retrocausality is the hypothesis that causation can operate backward in time—that future events can influence past ones. In the context of consciousness, retrocausality offers a resolution to the apparent problem of neural activity preceding conscious awareness: if consciousness can influence outcomes retrocausally, the temporal ordering of brain events poses no obstacle to genuine mental causation.

This concept matters for the project's framework because the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness causally influences the physical world. Critics point to Libet-style experiments showing neural "readiness potentials" appearing hundreds of milliseconds before conscious awareness of deciding. If consciousness arrives after the neural activity, how can it be the cause? Retrocausality dissolves this objection.

## The Puzzle of Temporal Ordering

[[libet-experiments|Benjamin Libet's experiments]] (1983) and subsequent studies by Soon et al. (2008) revealed that brain activity predictive of a decision can occur before a person becomes aware of deciding. The readiness potential appears ~350ms before conscious awareness; fMRI studies extended this to seconds. Importantly, Schurger et al. (2012) challenged the standard interpretation, arguing the readiness potential may be neural noise rather than decision preparation—but even if this critique succeeds, retrocausality offers a more fundamental resolution.

This seems to pose a problem: if the neural activity comes first, isn't consciousness merely informed of decisions already made? Doesn't this reduce consciousness to an epiphenomenon—a passenger rather than a driver?

The retrocausal response: temporal precedence does not establish causal priority. If effects can precede causes, then consciousness occurring "after" neural activity is no obstacle to consciousness being the cause.

## Retrocausality in Physics

Retrocausality isn't philosophical speculation divorced from physics—it has serious proponents and empirical grounding.

### Time-Symmetric Quantum Mechanics

The fundamental equations of quantum mechanics are time-symmetric: they work equally well run forward or backward. The apparent "arrow of time" in quantum measurement is an addition to the formalism, not derivable from it. Philosophers like Huw Price argue that if physics is time-symmetric and causal, retrocausality follows necessarily.

This connects to the deeper question of [[collapse-and-time|collapse and temporal asymmetry]]. Multiple arrows of time have been identified—thermodynamic, cosmological, electromagnetic, psychological—but whether quantum measurement introduces an independent arrow remains contested. If collapse is real and genuinely irreversible, consciousness's participation in collapse links it to the structure of time itself, not merely to events occurring within time.

### Wheeler's Delayed-Choice Experiment

John Wheeler proposed (and subsequent experiments confirmed) that a measurement choice made *after* a particle has passed through a double-slit apparatus can determine whether the particle behaved as a wave or particle *earlier*. In the standard interpretation, this reflects quantum superposition persisting until measurement. In the retrocausal interpretation, the later measurement genuinely influences the earlier behaviour.

The 2017 satellite experiment extended delayed-choice over distances of thousands of kilometres, confirming the effect at cosmic scales.

### The Transactional Interpretation

John Cramer's transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics (1986) makes retrocausality explicit. Quantum events involve:

1. **Offer waves** propagating forward in time from the emitter
2. **Confirmation waves** propagating backward in time from the absorber
3. A **handshake** between future and past that creates the transaction

In this picture, the wave function is physically real, not merely a calculation tool. Transactions are "atemporal"—the collapse occurs along the entire transaction simultaneously, with no privileged temporal direction. The Born Rule (probability = amplitude squared) emerges naturally from the handshake.

### Bell Tests and Nonlocality

Bell test experiments demonstrate correlations between entangled particles that cannot be explained by local hidden variables. The standard response invokes nonlocality: influences propagating faster than light. But retrocausal models offer an alternative: the correlations arise because later measurements retroactively influence earlier states. This preserves locality at the cost of temporal direction.

## Application to Consciousness

How does retrocausality help with consciousness and the Libet problem?

### the project's Framework

The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]] proposes that consciousness influences the physical world at the quantum level—biasing otherwise indeterminate outcomes. The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] holds that consciousness selects among superposed neural states.

If this selection operates retrocausally, then:

1. The brain prepares multiple possible action patterns (superposition)
2. Neural activity builds up, reflecting all possibilities
3. Consciousness "selects" which pattern becomes actual
4. This selection propagates backward, determining which neural history becomes real
5. What appears as neural activity "predicting" the decision is actually the selected history

The readiness potential doesn't precede conscious choice in any causally significant sense—it's part of the package that consciousness selected, including its temporal ordering.

The [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will|systematic treatment of quantum indeterminacy and free will]] develops this framework in detail, showing how retrocausality dissolves the temporal ordering problem within the broader context of the [[luck-objection|luck objection]] response. Consciousness doesn't merely select an outcome—it selects the entire temporal sequence, including the neural preparation that appears to "precede" awareness. This transforms what looks like deterministic prediction into selected history.

### The Atemporal Selection Model

Cramer's transactional interpretation suggests that quantum transactions are fundamentally atemporal. If consciousness operates at this level, then conscious selection might also be atemporal—not occurring at a moment in linear time but determining which moments become actual.

In this picture, asking "when does consciousness make the decision?" may be the wrong question. The decision isn't made *at* a time; it determines *which* times (and their contents) become real. As explored in [[collapse-and-time]], this has profound implications: consciousness wouldn't merely experience time's flow but would help constitute temporal structure through the pattern of selections it makes across transactions.

### Addressing Objections

**Objection**: If consciousness can affect the past, why can't we change history?

**Response**: Retrocausality doesn't imply we can alter established facts. The handshake between future and past creates a consistent transaction. There's no alternate timeline where things went differently—the retrocausal influence is part of how the one real history came to be.

**Objection**: Isn't this unfalsifiable?

**Response**: Retrocausal interpretations make the same predictions as standard quantum mechanics for all currently testable scenarios. This isn't a weakness unique to retrocausality—all quantum interpretations (Copenhagen, Many-Worlds, Bohmian) share this feature. The question is which interpretation makes best sense of what we observe.

**Objection**: Why should consciousness specifically have retrocausal powers?

**Response**: The claim isn't that consciousness *adds* retrocausal powers to physics but that physics already includes retrocausality, and consciousness operates at the level where this matters. If consciousness interacts with quantum processes (per the project's tenets), it inherits the temporal properties of those processes.

## Connection to Quantum Consciousness Mechanisms

Retrocausality complements the specific [[quantum-consciousness|quantum consciousness mechanisms]] proposed by researchers like Penrose-Hameroff (Orch OR) and Henry Stapp. These mechanisms explain *where* in the brain consciousness might interface with quantum processes; retrocausality explains *how* the temporal ordering puzzle dissolves.

**Orch OR and retrocausality**: Penrose and Hameroff propose that consciousness emerges through quantum collapse events in neuronal microtubules. If these collapses have retrocausal aspects (as the transactional interpretation suggests), then the "moment" of consciousness selecting a particular collapse outcome need not precede the neural activity it shapes. The collapse event and its preparation form an atemporal transaction.

**Stapp's quantum Zeno and retrocausality**: Stapp's model proposes that conscious attention acts like repeated quantum observations, stabilizing desired neural patterns. Combined with retrocausality, this suggests attention might work through retrocausal handshakes—the later "observation" events retroactively constraining which neural patterns were ever available. The Zeno freezing operates across time, not merely within it.

Both approaches benefit from retrocausality because it dissolves the Libet objection without requiring consciousness to somehow "speed up" to precede neural preparation.

### Motor Selection: Independent Corroboration

The retrocausal framework gains support from [[motor-selection|motor control research]]. Willed movement shows the same neural signatures as willed attention—frontal theta oscillations, ~300ms deployment time, distinct willed vs instructed signatures. If retrocausal selection operated only in attention, skeptics might dismiss it as interpretation-dependent. But two independent domains showing identical selection architecture suggests the framework captures something real.

Importantly, the Libet challenge to motor control has weakened substantially. Sjöberg (2024) demonstrated that surgical resection of the supplementary motor area—where the readiness potential is generated—doesn't impair voluntary action. Desmurget's double dissociation separates intention (parietal) from execution (premotor). The readiness potential may be preparation for execution, not the decision itself. Retrocausality explains why: consciousness selected the complete motor sequence, including its temporal preparation.

## Time Ontology and Retrocausality

Retrocausality raises a puzzle about the [[philosophy-of-time|ontology of time]]. The transactional interpretation requires confirmation waves propagating *from* the future—but if the future doesn't exist yet (presentism), what sends these waves? This seems to favor eternalism: all times exist equally, so the future is "there" to participate in transactions.

Yet the project's framework requires real collapse—which introduces genuine temporal asymmetry, favoring A-theory (real temporal becoming) over pure B-theory eternalism where time's flow is illusory.

the project's [[time-collapse-and-agency|temporal framework]] proposes a resolution: a **modified growing block** where:

1. Retrocausality operates within the time-symmetric physics *before* collapse establishes temporal direction
2. Collapse—including consciousness-involving collapse—creates irreversible temporal structure
3. After collapse, the selected history is simply the history (amenable to B-theoretic description)
4. The "future" that participates in retrocausal transactions is the space of quantum possibilities, not ontologically existing future facts

On this view, retrocausality doesn't require eternalism in the strong sense. What it requires is that quantum processes involve boundary conditions at both ends of a transaction—but these boundary conditions can be superposed possibilities rather than determinate futures. The handshake between offer and confirmation waves selects which possibilities become actual, growing the block.

This preserves the key insight: the future is genuinely open (not already existing), yet retrocausal physics can operate because superposed possibilities extend forward. Collapse—including consciousness-mediated selection—determines which possibilities resolve into the single actual history.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Retrocausality offers the strongest available resolution to the temporal ordering objection against conscious causation. If the [[tenets|site's tenets]] are correct—if consciousness genuinely influences which quantum outcomes become actual—then retrocausal models provide the mechanism for how this influence can appear "after" the neural activity it shapes.

This doesn't prove the tenets are correct. It shows that a coherent physical picture exists in which:
- Consciousness causally influences the brain
- Neural activity can precede conscious awareness
- These two facts are fully compatible

The Libet experiments don't refute conscious causation; they reveal that conscious causation may operate outside the linear temporal order we normally assume.

## Further Reading

- [[quantum-indeterminacy-free-will]] — Systematic treatment of how quantum indeterminacy supports libertarian free will, including the retrocausal resolution
- [[motor-selection]] — Motor control as a second selection domain showing identical architecture
- [[philosophy-of-time]] — McTaggart's A/B series, presentism vs eternalism, and how the project reconciles these with retrocausality
- [[collapse-and-time]] — How collapse introduces temporal asymmetry and why consciousness may be constitutive of time's arrow
- [[time-collapse-and-agency]] — the project's full treatment of time, collapse, and conscious agency
- [[libet-experiments]] — Detailed treatment of Libet's experiments, Schurger's neural noise critique, and the retrocausal resolution
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Specific quantum mechanisms (Orch OR, Stapp's Zeno) that retrocausality complements
- [[luck-objection]] — Why consciousness-selected outcomes differ from lucky random events
- [[tenets]] — the project's foundational commitments, especially Bidirectional Interaction and Minimal Quantum Interaction
- [[locality]] — Related concept on how non-local effects work without violating causality
- [[libet-experiments-free-will-2026-01-07|Libet Research Notes]] — Original research notes

## References

- Cramer, J. G. (1986). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 58(3), 647.
- Price, H. (2012). Does time-symmetry imply retrocausality? *Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B*, 43(2), 75-83.
- Wheeler, J. A. (1978). The "past" and the "delayed-choice" double-slit experiment. In *Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory* (pp. 9-48). Academic Press.
- Libet, B. et al. (1983). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity. *Brain*, 106(3), 623-642.
- Leifer, M. S., & Spekkens, R. W. (2013). Towards a formulation of quantum theory as a causally neutral theory of Bayesian inference. *Physical Review A*, 88(5), 052130.
