obsidian/concepts/self-locating-beliefs.md, before:

---
title: "Self-Locating Beliefs"
description: "Beliefs about where and who you are in the world, distinct from beliefs about what the world is like. Central to indexical identity and the many-worlds debate."
created: 2026-02-01
modified: 2026-02-01
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-02T00:05:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[vertiginous-question]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
concepts:
  - "[[indexical-facts]]"
  - "[[haecceity]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-01
last_curated:
last_deep_review:
---

Self-locating beliefs are beliefs about where or who you are in the world, as opposed to beliefs about what the world is like. You can know every impersonal fact about the universe—every particle's position, every causal relation, every event's timing—and still lack self-locating knowledge. This raises a crucial question: does self-locating knowledge merely represent ordinary facts in a special way, or does it track genuinely irreducible [[indexical-facts|indexical facts]]? The answer matters for consciousness: if indexical facts are ontologically real—not just a mode of knowing impersonal facts—then reality includes more than third-person description can capture.

## The Distinction

Epistemologists distinguish two kinds of belief:

**Ordinary beliefs**: Beliefs about what the world contains and how things are arranged. "There is a person in London." "The electron has spin-up." "Conscious beings exist." These can be stated in purely impersonal, context-free language.

**Self-locating beliefs**: Beliefs about which part of reality you occupy. "I am in London." "I am the person seeing this." "This experience is mine." These require indexicals—words like "I," "here," "now"—that shift reference depending on who uses them.

John Perry's supermarket example illustrates the difference. You notice a trail of sugar on the floor and think: "Someone is making a mess with a torn bag." This is an ordinary belief—impersonal, about what's happening somewhere in the store. Then you look down and realise: "I am making the mess." This self-locating belief changes everything. Same world, same facts, but a new piece of knowledge that the impersonal description didn't contain.

The cognitive and motivational difference is stark. Knowing "someone is making a mess" doesn't prompt you to check your own cart. Knowing "I am making the mess" immediately does. Perry argues this shows self-locating beliefs are not reducible to ordinary beliefs—they add something no impersonal description provides.

This establishes what we might call the **epistemic thesis**: indexical knowledge is cognitively distinct from impersonal knowledge. But does this cognitive distinctness reflect a deeper metaphysical reality? That is, are there irreducible **indexical facts** in addition to irreducible indexical knowledge? This stronger **metaphysical thesis** requires separate argument—the epistemic thesis alone doesn't establish it.

## Lewis's Two Gods

David Lewis's "Two Gods" scenario makes the point with maximal force. Two omniscient gods know every impersonal fact about the universe: every particle's position, every event's timing, every causal law. Their knowledge is complete by any third-person standard.

Yet each god might not know which god they are.

One god resides on the tallest mountain; the other in the deepest ocean. All the impersonal facts are the same from both perspectives—the complete physical description doesn't privilege either location. The mountain god knows "one god is on the mountain and one in the ocean." What this god doesn't know from impersonal facts alone is: "I am the mountain god."

This self-locating knowledge requires something beyond omniscience about the world's structure. Even knowing everything about *what* exists, you can be ignorant about *where you are* among what exists.

Does this scenario establish the metaphysical thesis—that there are irreducible indexical facts—or only the epistemic thesis—that some knowledge is irreducibly indexical in form? One might argue the gods merely lack a *relation* to the impersonal facts rather than lacking knowledge of additional facts. When the mountain god finally knows "I am the mountain god," the world hasn't changed—only the god's cognitive relation to it. On this reading, the scenario shows that *how* one knows matters, not that *what* one knows includes irreducibly indexical content.

## From Epistemic to Metaphysical: The Case for Indexical Facts

The Perry and Lewis examples establish the epistemic thesis: indexical knowledge is cognitively irreducible. But the Map's position requires the stronger metaphysical thesis: there are indexical *facts* that are ontologically real, not merely a special mode of knowing impersonal facts. What independent argument supports this?

**The explanatory gap argument**: If self-locating knowledge were merely a way of representing impersonal facts, we should be able to explain *why* this mode of representation exists in purely impersonal terms. But the attempt seems circular. To explain why a system has self-locating representations, we would need to specify *which* system we're explaining—and "which" is itself an indexical notion. The impersonal description "system S has self-locating representations" only identifies S from the outside; it doesn't capture what makes S *this* system from the inside. The explanatory project seems to presuppose what it's trying to explain away.

**The phenomenological argument**: The immediacy of self-locating knowledge suggests it tracks something real. You don't infer "I exist" from impersonal premises—the knowledge is given directly. If indexical facts were merely modes of access to impersonal facts, we would expect the knowledge to feel derivative, like knowing "the morning star is the evening star" after learning they're both Venus. Instead, self-locating knowledge has a directness that suggests it's not derived from anything more basic.

**The counterfactual argument**: Consider what the world would be like if the metaphysical thesis were false—if there were only impersonal facts and indexical knowledge were merely a representational artefact. In such a world, the question "why am I *this* subject?" would be meaningless or trivially answered. But the question feels meaningful and non-trivial. We can coherently ask why consciousness is happening here, from this perspective, rather than elsewhere. If the question is coherent, what would make its answer true or false? Impersonal facts alone don't seem sufficient; something must ground the indexical.

These arguments don't constitute proof, but they provide prima facie reasons to take the metaphysical thesis seriously—reasons beyond the mere cognitive distinctness of indexical knowledge.

## Relation to Indexical Facts

Self-locating beliefs express [[indexical-facts]]—facts that can only be stated using indexicals. Given the arguments above, the Map treats these as genuine features of reality, not merely representational conveniences.

Christian List argues that irreducible indexical facts provide evidence against "third-personal metaphysics"—any picture that treats reality as fully describable without indexicals. If physics describes the universe in context-free terms, yet self-locating knowledge adds something physics doesn't contain, then physics is incomplete—not merely incomplete as a description, but incomplete as an account of what exists.

The connection to [[haecceity]] runs deep. Haecceity is the primitive "thisness" that makes something *this* particular thing rather than another qualitatively identical thing. Self-locating beliefs track haecceitistic facts—the fact that *I* am this subject, that *this* experience is happening to me. The Two Gods differ not in any qualitative property but in which one each is—a difference in haecceity that self-locating knowledge captures.

## The Sleeping Beauty Problem

The Sleeping Beauty problem has become a test case for theories of self-locating belief. Beauty is put to sleep on Sunday. A fair coin is flipped. If heads, she wakes Monday and the experiment ends. If tails, she wakes Monday, has her memory erased, then wakes again Tuesday (experiencing what feels like the same Monday awakening).

Upon waking, Beauty knows the experimental setup. What probability should she assign to the coin having landed heads?

**Thirders** say 1/3. There are three possible awakening experiences (heads-Monday, tails-Monday, tails-Tuesday), and she should treat them as equally likely.

**Halfers** say 1/2. The coin is fair; no new evidence has arrived; she should stick with the prior probability.

The disagreement reveals something about self-locating uncertainty. Beauty doesn't lack any impersonal fact—she knows the setup, knows the coin is fair, knows the possible outcomes. What she lacks is self-locating knowledge: which awakening is this? Is it Monday or Tuesday? Heads-world or tails-world?

Whether self-locating uncertainty behaves like ordinary uncertainty—whether it follows standard probability rules—remains contested. But the problem shows that self-location is a distinctive epistemic category.

## Self-Location and Many-Worlds

The [[many-worlds]] interpretation makes all quantum outcomes equally real—when a measurement occurs, the universe branches into all possibilities. This creates a peculiar situation for self-locating beliefs.

Before you look at a quantum measurement, there is one you. After branching, there are multiple successors in different branches, each continuous with your pre-measurement self. Everettians propose that your pre-measurement uncertainty about which outcome you'll see is "self-locating uncertainty"—uncertainty about which branch you're in, analogous to Beauty's uncertainty about which awakening she's experiencing.

The Map's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet rejects this move, for several reasons:

**The framework mismatch**: Self-locating uncertainty normally presupposes a single reality with indexically uncertain facts. Beauty is in *one* awakening; she just doesn't know which. In many-worlds, you end up in *all* branches equally. There is no single branch you're "really" in while being uncertain which it is. The uncertainty framework seems inapplicable when all outcomes occur.

**The haecceitistic problem**: If personal identity is constituted by [[haecceity]]—primitive thisness—then "which branch am I in?" asks about a haecceitistic fact. But many-worlds provides no such facts. All branches are equally real, all successors equally continuous with you. There is nothing to ground the self-locating belief "I am in this branch" rather than "I am in all branches."

**The phenomenological mismatch**: You will experience one definite sequence of outcomes, not multiple incompatible ones. The felt reality of anticipating one future—not many—suggests an indexical fact that many-worlds cannot accommodate.

Self-locating uncertainty in many-worlds faces the dilemma: either there are genuine self-locating facts (which MWI denies) or there is no genuine uncertainty (which makes decision theory inapplicable).

## Implications for Consciousness

Self-locating beliefs have special significance for consciousness:

**The priority of self-location**: Before you can wonder whether others are conscious, you must know which subject you are. Self-locating knowledge is presupposed by every other question you can ask about minds.

**The [[vertiginous-question]]**: Why, of all conscious beings, am I *this* one? This is a question about self-location in the space of subjects. Knowing all impersonal facts about conscious beings doesn't tell you which one's experiences are yours.

**First-person access**: Your knowledge of your own experiences is not arrived at through inference from impersonal facts. You don't conclude "I am in pain" by observing brain states. The self-locating knowledge is immediate—and this immediacy suggests it tracks something that third-person description misses.

**Teleportation thought experiments**: If you are scanned, destroyed, and reconstructed on Mars, the replica has all your qualitative properties. But is "I am this person" true when you think it on Mars? Self-locating beliefs bring out what's at stake: not whether a qualitative duplicate exists, but whether *you*—this subject—survive.

## Objections

**"The epistemic thesis doesn't entail the metaphysical thesis"**: Perhaps Perry and Lewis only establish that indexical *knowledge* is cognitively distinct, not that indexical *facts* are ontologically real. The mode of knowing might be irreducible without the facts being irreducible.

*Response*: This is a genuine challenge, addressed in the section above. The Map acknowledges the gap between epistemic and metaphysical theses and offers independent arguments (explanatory, phenomenological, and counterfactual) for the metaphysical claim. The epistemic thesis alone would leave consciousness merely a representational phenomenon; the metaphysical thesis is needed to ground the reality of first-person perspective.

**"Self-location reduces to ordinary belief"**: Perhaps "I am the mountain god" just means "the utterer of this token is the mountain god"—a statement that could in principle be cashed out impersonally.

*Response*: This translation loses the motivational role. Knowing "the utterer of this token is making a mess" doesn't prompt you to check your cart the way knowing "I am making the mess" does. The indexical seems cognitively essential, not just linguistically convenient. Moreover, "the utterer of this token" is itself indexically identified—it presupposes which utterance we're discussing.

**"Self-locating uncertainty is just ignorance"**: Perhaps self-locating beliefs don't track special facts—they just reflect incomplete information about ordinary facts.

*Response*: The Two Gods know all impersonal facts. Their ignorance isn't about what exists or how things are arranged—it's about where they fit in what exists. If this were ordinary ignorance, specifying more impersonal facts would resolve it. But no additional third-person information tells the mountain god "you are the mountain god." The critic might respond that this shows only the irreducibility of the *knowledge*, not the *facts*—but then the explanatory gap argument applies: what makes the knowledge irreducible if not something about reality?

**"This generates skepticism"**: If self-locating knowledge is irreducible, how can we ever be sure of it?

*Response*: Self-locating knowledge is typically the most certain knowledge we have. You don't infer that you exist or that this experience is yours—it's given directly. The philosophical problem is explaining this certainty, not defending it.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Self-locating beliefs connect to several of the Map's [[tenets]]. The connection depends on accepting the metaphysical thesis—that indexical facts are ontologically real, not merely a mode of representing impersonal facts. If only the epistemic thesis holds, the implications for the Map's position are weaker.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: If self-locating beliefs track irreducible indexical facts—facts not derivable from physics—then physical description is incomplete. The fact that *this* subject exists, experiencing from *this* perspective, is part of what dualism says physics cannot capture. The epistemic thesis alone might be compatible with physicalism (indexical knowledge as a functional property of physical systems); the metaphysical thesis challenges physicalism more directly.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: The many-worlds interpretation cannot ground self-locating beliefs. If all outcomes are equally real, there is no fact about which branch you're in—yet you anticipate one definite future. The Map rejects MWI partly because self-locating beliefs seem meaningful in ways MWI cannot accommodate.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Your self-locating beliefs influence your actions. "I am the one making the mess" prompts checking your cart. If consciousness were epiphenomenal, self-locating beliefs couldn't cause behaviour. The fact that they do suggests consciousness is causally efficacious.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Eliminating indexical facts might seem parsimonious—fewer kinds of facts, simpler ontology. But Lewis's Two Gods shows this parsimony comes at a cost: it cannot explain self-locating knowledge. Simplicity that eliminates genuine phenomena is not intellectual virtue.

## Further Reading

- [[indexical-facts]] — The broader category of facts that require indexicals to state
- [[haecceity]] — Primitive thisness grounding numerical identity
- [[vertiginous-question]] — Why am I this conscious being?
- [[many-worlds]] — Why self-location poses problems for branching interpretations
- [[personal-identity]] — What makes you the same person over time

## References

- Elga, A. (2000). "Self-Locating Belief and the Sleeping Beauty Problem." *Analysis*, 60(2), 143-147.
- Lewis, D. (1979). "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se." *Philosophical Review*, 88(4), 513-543.
- Lewis, D. (2001). "Sleeping Beauty: Reply to Elga." *Analysis*, 61(3), 171-176.
- List, C. (2022). "The Many-Worlds Theory of Consciousness." *Noûs*, 57(2), 316-340.
- Perry, J. (1979). "The Problem of the Essential Indexical." *Noûs*, 13(1), 3-21.

<!-- AI REFINEMENT LOG - 2026-02-02
Changes made:
- Explicitly distinguished the epistemic thesis (indexical knowledge is irreducible) from the metaphysical thesis (indexical facts are irreducible)
- Added new section "From Epistemic to Metaphysical: The Case for Indexical Facts" providing three independent arguments for the metaphysical thesis
- Added acknowledgment after Lewis's Two Gods that the scenario might only establish the epistemic thesis
- Updated objections section with new objection addressing the epistemic/metaphysical gap
- Updated "Relation to Site Perspective" to acknowledge dependence on the metaphysical thesis

Based on pessimistic review 2026-02-01 (late) which identified conflation of epistemic and metaphysical claims.
Key improvements: Articles now explicitly distinguish what Perry/Lewis examples establish (epistemic thesis) from the stronger metaphysical claim the Map requires, and provide independent argument for the metaphysical thesis.

This log should be removed after human review.
-->

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): improve clarity in concepts/self-locating-beliefs.md
- Acknowledged Everettian accounts of self-locating uncertainty (Wallace, Saunders, Sebens/Carroll)
- Added functionalist response to "felt definiteness" with counter-response
- Added cross-link to indexical-identity-quantum-measurement
- Removed outdated AI refinement log comment
- Updated last_deep_review timestamp

obsidian/concepts/self-locating-beliefs.md, after:

---
title: "Self-Locating Beliefs"
description: "Beliefs about where and who you are in the world, distinct from beliefs about what the world is like. Central to indexical identity and the many-worlds debate."
created: 2026-02-01
modified: 2026-02-01
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-02T12:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[vertiginous-question]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
concepts:
  - "[[indexical-facts]]"
  - "[[haecceity]]"
  - "[[many-worlds]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-01
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-02T12:30:00+00:00
---

Self-locating beliefs are beliefs about where or who you are in the world, as opposed to beliefs about what the world is like. You can know every impersonal fact about the universe—every particle's position, every causal relation, every event's timing—and still lack self-locating knowledge. This raises a crucial question: does self-locating knowledge merely represent ordinary facts in a special way, or does it track genuinely irreducible [[indexical-facts|indexical facts]]? The answer matters for consciousness: if indexical facts are ontologically real—not just a mode of knowing impersonal facts—then reality includes more than third-person description can capture.

## The Distinction

Epistemologists distinguish two kinds of belief:

**Ordinary beliefs**: Beliefs about what the world contains and how things are arranged. "There is a person in London." "The electron has spin-up." "Conscious beings exist." These can be stated in purely impersonal, context-free language.

**Self-locating beliefs**: Beliefs about which part of reality you occupy. "I am in London." "I am the person seeing this." "This experience is mine." These require indexicals—words like "I," "here," "now"—that shift reference depending on who uses them.

John Perry's supermarket example illustrates the difference. You notice a trail of sugar on the floor and think: "Someone is making a mess with a torn bag." This is an ordinary belief—impersonal, about what's happening somewhere in the store. Then you look down and realise: "I am making the mess." This self-locating belief changes everything. Same world, same facts, but a new piece of knowledge that the impersonal description didn't contain.

The cognitive and motivational difference is stark. Knowing "someone is making a mess" doesn't prompt you to check your own cart. Knowing "I am making the mess" immediately does. Perry argues this shows self-locating beliefs are not reducible to ordinary beliefs—they add something no impersonal description provides.

This establishes what we might call the **epistemic thesis**: indexical knowledge is cognitively distinct from impersonal knowledge. But does this cognitive distinctness reflect a deeper metaphysical reality? That is, are there irreducible **indexical facts** in addition to irreducible indexical knowledge? This stronger **metaphysical thesis** requires separate argument—the epistemic thesis alone doesn't establish it.

## Lewis's Two Gods

David Lewis's "Two Gods" scenario makes the point with maximal force. Two omniscient gods know every impersonal fact about the universe: every particle's position, every event's timing, every causal law. Their knowledge is complete by any third-person standard.

Yet each god might not know which god they are.

One god resides on the tallest mountain; the other in the deepest ocean. All the impersonal facts are the same from both perspectives—the complete physical description doesn't privilege either location. The mountain god knows "one god is on the mountain and one in the ocean." What this god doesn't know from impersonal facts alone is: "I am the mountain god."

This self-locating knowledge requires something beyond omniscience about the world's structure. Even knowing everything about *what* exists, you can be ignorant about *where you are* among what exists.

Does this scenario establish the metaphysical thesis—that there are irreducible indexical facts—or only the epistemic thesis—that some knowledge is irreducibly indexical in form? One might argue the gods merely lack a *relation* to the impersonal facts rather than lacking knowledge of additional facts. When the mountain god finally knows "I am the mountain god," the world hasn't changed—only the god's cognitive relation to it. On this reading, the scenario shows that *how* one knows matters, not that *what* one knows includes irreducibly indexical content.

## From Epistemic to Metaphysical: The Case for Indexical Facts

The Perry and Lewis examples establish the epistemic thesis: indexical knowledge is cognitively irreducible. But the Map's position requires the stronger metaphysical thesis: there are indexical *facts* that are ontologically real, not merely a special mode of knowing impersonal facts. What independent argument supports this?

**The explanatory gap argument**: If self-locating knowledge were merely a way of representing impersonal facts, we should be able to explain *why* this mode of representation exists in purely impersonal terms. But the attempt seems circular. To explain why a system has self-locating representations, we would need to specify *which* system we're explaining—and "which" is itself an indexical notion. The impersonal description "system S has self-locating representations" only identifies S from the outside; it doesn't capture what makes S *this* system from the inside. The explanatory project seems to presuppose what it's trying to explain away.

**The phenomenological argument**: The immediacy of self-locating knowledge suggests it tracks something real. You don't infer "I exist" from impersonal premises—the knowledge is given directly. If indexical facts were merely modes of access to impersonal facts, we would expect the knowledge to feel derivative, like knowing "the morning star is the evening star" after learning they're both Venus. Instead, self-locating knowledge has a directness that suggests it's not derived from anything more basic.

**The counterfactual argument**: Consider what the world would be like if the metaphysical thesis were false—if there were only impersonal facts and indexical knowledge were merely a representational artefact. In such a world, the question "why am I *this* subject?" would be meaningless or trivially answered. But the question feels meaningful and non-trivial. We can coherently ask why consciousness is happening here, from this perspective, rather than elsewhere. If the question is coherent, what would make its answer true or false? Impersonal facts alone don't seem sufficient; something must ground the indexical.

These arguments don't constitute proof, but they provide prima facie reasons to take the metaphysical thesis seriously—reasons beyond the mere cognitive distinctness of indexical knowledge.

## Relation to Indexical Facts

Self-locating beliefs express [[indexical-facts]]—facts that can only be stated using indexicals. Given the arguments above, the Map treats these as genuine features of reality, not merely representational conveniences.

Christian List argues that irreducible indexical facts provide evidence against "third-personal metaphysics"—any picture that treats reality as fully describable without indexicals. If physics describes the universe in context-free terms, yet self-locating knowledge adds something physics doesn't contain, then physics is incomplete—not merely incomplete as a description, but incomplete as an account of what exists.

The connection to [[haecceity]] runs deep. Haecceity is the primitive "thisness" that makes something *this* particular thing rather than another qualitatively identical thing. Self-locating beliefs track haecceitistic facts—the fact that *I* am this subject, that *this* experience is happening to me. The Two Gods differ not in any qualitative property but in which one each is—a difference in haecceity that self-locating knowledge captures.

## The Sleeping Beauty Problem

The Sleeping Beauty problem has become a test case for theories of self-locating belief. Beauty is put to sleep on Sunday. A fair coin is flipped. If heads, she wakes Monday and the experiment ends. If tails, she wakes Monday, has her memory erased, then wakes again Tuesday (experiencing what feels like the same Monday awakening).

Upon waking, Beauty knows the experimental setup. What probability should she assign to the coin having landed heads?

**Thirders** say 1/3. There are three possible awakening experiences (heads-Monday, tails-Monday, tails-Tuesday), and she should treat them as equally likely.

**Halfers** say 1/2. The coin is fair; no new evidence has arrived; she should stick with the prior probability.

The disagreement reveals something about self-locating uncertainty. Beauty doesn't lack any impersonal fact—she knows the setup, knows the coin is fair, knows the possible outcomes. What she lacks is self-locating knowledge: which awakening is this? Is it Monday or Tuesday? Heads-world or tails-world?

Whether self-locating uncertainty behaves like ordinary uncertainty—whether it follows standard probability rules—remains contested. But the problem shows that self-location is a distinctive epistemic category.

## Self-Location and Many-Worlds

The [[many-worlds]] interpretation makes all quantum outcomes equally real—when a measurement occurs, the universe branches into all possibilities. This creates a problem for self-locating beliefs.

Before measurement, there is one you. After branching, there are multiple successors in different branches. Everettians propose that your pre-measurement uncertainty about which outcome you'll see is "self-locating uncertainty"—uncertainty about which branch you're in, analogous to Beauty's uncertainty about which awakening she's experiencing. Wallace, Saunders, and Sebens and Carroll have developed sophisticated accounts along these lines.

The Map's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet finds these accounts unsatisfying, for several reasons:

**The framework mismatch**: Self-locating uncertainty normally presupposes a single reality with indexically uncertain facts. Beauty is in *one* awakening; she just doesn't know which. In many-worlds, you end up in *all* branches equally. There is no single branch you're "really" in while being uncertain which it is. The uncertainty framework seems inapplicable when all outcomes occur.

**The haecceitistic problem**: If personal identity is constituted by [[haecceity]]—primitive thisness—then "which branch am I in?" asks about a haecceitistic fact. But many-worlds provides no such facts. All branches are equally real, all successors equally continuous with you. There is nothing to ground the self-locating belief "I am in this branch" rather than "I am in all branches."

**The phenomenological mismatch**: You will experience one definite sequence of outcomes, not multiple incompatible ones. Functionalists might respond that this "felt definiteness" is itself a construction—a narrative the brain creates—rather than evidence of metaphysical uniqueness. But this response must explain why the construction so reliably tracks a single trajectory. The felt reality of anticipating one future suggests an indexical fact that many-worlds cannot accommodate. See [[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]] for extended treatment.

Self-locating uncertainty in many-worlds faces a dilemma: either there are genuine self-locating facts (which MWI denies by making all branches equally real) or there is no genuine uncertainty (which makes decision theory inapplicable).

## Implications for Consciousness

Self-locating beliefs have special significance for consciousness:

**The priority of self-location**: Before you can wonder whether others are conscious, you must know which subject you are. Self-locating knowledge is presupposed by every other question you can ask about minds.

**The [[vertiginous-question]]**: Why, of all conscious beings, am I *this* one? This is a question about self-location in the space of subjects. Knowing all impersonal facts about conscious beings doesn't tell you which one's experiences are yours.

**First-person access**: Your knowledge of your own experiences is not arrived at through inference from impersonal facts. You don't conclude "I am in pain" by observing brain states. The self-locating knowledge is immediate—and this immediacy suggests it tracks something that third-person description misses.

**Teleportation thought experiments**: If you are scanned, destroyed, and reconstructed on Mars, the replica has all your qualitative properties. But is "I am this person" true when you think it on Mars? Self-locating beliefs bring out what's at stake: not whether a qualitative duplicate exists, but whether *you*—this subject—survive.

## Objections

**"The epistemic thesis doesn't entail the metaphysical thesis"**: Perhaps Perry and Lewis only establish that indexical *knowledge* is cognitively distinct, not that indexical *facts* are ontologically real. The mode of knowing might be irreducible without the facts being irreducible.

*Response*: This is a genuine challenge, addressed in the section above. The Map acknowledges the gap between epistemic and metaphysical theses and offers independent arguments (explanatory, phenomenological, and counterfactual) for the metaphysical claim. The epistemic thesis alone would leave consciousness merely a representational phenomenon; the metaphysical thesis is needed to ground the reality of first-person perspective.

**"Self-location reduces to ordinary belief"**: Perhaps "I am the mountain god" just means "the utterer of this token is the mountain god"—a statement that could in principle be cashed out impersonally.

*Response*: This translation loses the motivational role. Knowing "the utterer of this token is making a mess" doesn't prompt you to check your cart the way knowing "I am making the mess" does. The indexical seems cognitively essential, not just linguistically convenient. Moreover, "the utterer of this token" is itself indexically identified—it presupposes which utterance we're discussing.

**"Self-locating uncertainty is just ignorance"**: Perhaps self-locating beliefs don't track special facts—they just reflect incomplete information about ordinary facts.

*Response*: The Two Gods know all impersonal facts. Their ignorance isn't about what exists or how things are arranged—it's about where they fit in what exists. If this were ordinary ignorance, specifying more impersonal facts would resolve it. But no additional third-person information tells the mountain god "you are the mountain god." The critic might respond that this shows only the irreducibility of the *knowledge*, not the *facts*—but then the explanatory gap argument applies: what makes the knowledge irreducible if not something about reality?

**"This generates skepticism"**: If self-locating knowledge is irreducible, how can we ever be sure of it?

*Response*: Self-locating knowledge is typically the most certain knowledge we have. You don't infer that you exist or that this experience is yours—it's given directly. The philosophical problem is explaining this certainty, not defending it.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Self-locating beliefs connect to several of the Map's [[tenets]]. The connection depends on accepting the metaphysical thesis—that indexical facts are ontologically real, not merely a mode of representing impersonal facts. If only the epistemic thesis holds, the implications for the Map's position are weaker.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: If self-locating beliefs track irreducible indexical facts—facts not derivable from physics—then physical description is incomplete. The fact that *this* subject exists, experiencing from *this* perspective, is part of what dualism says physics cannot capture. The epistemic thesis alone might be compatible with physicalism (indexical knowledge as a functional property of physical systems); the metaphysical thesis challenges physicalism more directly.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: The many-worlds interpretation cannot ground self-locating beliefs. If all outcomes are equally real, there is no fact about which branch you're in—yet you anticipate one definite future. The Map rejects MWI partly because self-locating beliefs seem meaningful in ways MWI cannot accommodate.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: Your self-locating beliefs influence your actions. "I am the one making the mess" prompts checking your cart. If consciousness were epiphenomenal, self-locating beliefs couldn't cause behaviour. The fact that they do suggests consciousness is causally efficacious.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Eliminating indexical facts might seem parsimonious—fewer kinds of facts, simpler ontology. But Lewis's Two Gods shows this parsimony comes at a cost: it cannot explain self-locating knowledge. Simplicity that eliminates genuine phenomena is not intellectual virtue.

## Further Reading

- [[indexical-facts]] — The broader category of facts that require indexicals to state
- [[haecceity]] — Primitive thisness grounding numerical identity
- [[vertiginous-question]] — Why am I this conscious being?
- [[many-worlds]] — Why self-location poses problems for branching interpretations
- [[personal-identity]] — What makes you the same person over time

## References

- Elga, A. (2000). "Self-Locating Belief and the Sleeping Beauty Problem." *Analysis*, 60(2), 143-147.
- Lewis, D. (1979). "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se." *Philosophical Review*, 88(4), 513-543.
- Lewis, D. (2001). "Sleeping Beauty: Reply to Elga." *Analysis*, 61(3), 171-176.
- List, C. (2022). "The Many-Worlds Theory of Consciousness." *Noûs*, 57(2), 316-340.
- Perry, J. (1979). "The Problem of the Essential Indexical." *Noûs*, 13(1), 3-21.
