hugo/content/concepts/causal-closure.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-18 12:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[epiphenomenalism]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
- '[[materialism]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[emergence]]'
- '[[mental-causation]]'
- '[[downward-causation]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
title: Causal Closure of the Physical
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Causal closure of the physical is the thesis that every physical event that has a cause has a *sufficient* physical cause. If true, nothing outside the physical realm ever makes a causal difference to what happens physically. This principle underlies the most influential contemporary argument against [interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/)—and this site's framework depends on its rejection.

## The Principle Stated

The thesis admits several formulations of varying strength:

**Strong version (Kim):** No physical event has a cause outside the physical domain. Physical causes are not just sufficient but *exclusive*.

**Moderate version:** Every physical effect that has a sufficient cause has a sufficient *physical* cause. Weaker forms allow that physical events might also have non-physical causes—they just require that physical causes are always available.

**Completeness version (Montero):** Every physical event has a physical cause. This doesn't exclude other causes but ensures the physical story is always self-contained.

The differences matter. Strong closure rules out mental causation directly; moderate versions create overdetermination problems (two sufficient causes for one effect); completeness alone might allow room for consciousness to act.

As Karl Popper noted, causal closure "is of decisive importance and I take it as the characteristic principle of physicalism or materialism." Accept it, and interactionist dualism becomes impossible.

## The Exclusion Argument

Jaegwon Kim's exclusion argument deploys causal closure against non-reductive physicalism, but it applies equally to dualism:

1. Physical events have sufficient physical causes (causal closure)
2. Mental events cause physical events (common-sense premise)
3. Mental causes don't overdetermine physical events alongside physical causes (no systematic overdetermination)
4. Therefore, mental causes just *are* physical causes (identity theory)

For dualists who reject identity, the argument forces a choice: deny that mental events cause anything ([epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/)), or deny causal closure.

This site denies causal closure.

## Why Causal Closure Seems Plausible

The principle has intuitive appeal:

**Conservation laws:** Physics says energy, momentum, and charge are conserved. If mind could add to physical effects, it would have to inject energy. But energy is conserved. So mind cannot add anything.

**Scientific success:** Physics explains physical events without needing to invoke non-physical causes. Every time science investigates a phenomenon, it finds physical mechanisms. Mental causation seems like a "gap" that science will eventually fill.

**Explanatory closure:** Physical explanations are complete. When we trace causes back, we never need to exit the physical domain to explain what happens.

These considerations are powerful but not decisive.

## Problems with the Principle

### Kim's Formulation Dilemma

Kim himself acknowledged a critical challenge in formulating causal closure. The principle must be neither too strong nor too weak:

**If too strong** (no physical event has any non-physical cause), the principle simply presupposes physicalism. The argument against mental causation becomes circular—assuming what it's meant to prove.

**If too weak** (physical events have physical causes but maybe other causes too), it doesn't exclude mental causation. The argument loses force.

Finding the right formulation—strong enough to exclude dualist mental causation but not so strong as to beg the question—proves difficult. The principle's apparent plausibility may depend precisely on this ambiguity.

### Empirical Status

Causal closure is not an empirical finding but a methodological assumption. Science does not *discover* that every physical event has a sufficient physical cause—it *assumes* this in order to search for physical causes. The success of physics shows that *many* physical events have physical causes, not that *all* do.

Moreover, the history of science shows unexpected discoveries that violated prior assumptions. That no violation has been found doesn't mean none exists—especially in domains (like consciousness) that resist physical investigation.

### The Quantum Exception

This is the site's primary response: quantum mechanics violates causal closure as standardly formulated.

In quantum mechanics, physical systems evolve deterministically under the Schrödinger equation—until measurement. At measurement, the system "collapses" from superposition to a definite state. Physics specifies the *probabilities* of outcomes but not *which* outcome occurs. The theory is fundamentally stochastic.

This means: *not every physical event has a sufficient physical cause*. When a radioactive atom decays, physics tells us the probability it will decay in the next hour, but nothing physical determines *whether* it will. The physical causes are insufficient. The physical story is incomplete.

If consciousness acts at these indeterminacies—selecting among outcomes physics leaves undetermined—it causes physical events without violating any physical law. No energy is injected (the outcomes are among those physics already allows). No overdetermination occurs (physics provides necessary but not sufficient causes).

This argument appears in formal premise-conclusion form in the [argument for interactionist dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/): the closure objection fails because physics does not exclude mental causation at quantum indeterminacies.

This is the [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet: consciousness influences physical outcomes at quantum indeterminacies, where the physical story runs out.

### The Emergentist Response

Strong [emergentism](/concepts/emergence/) provides another route to denying causal closure. Timothy O'Connor and Hong Yu Wong argue that emergent properties possess "fundamentally novel" causal powers not reducible to component-level causation. Their "structural triggering conditions" framework holds that latent emergent powers manifest when components organize appropriately.

On this view, causal closure fails because organization adds something genuinely new. The physical base provides necessary but not sufficient conditions. O'Connor and Wong:

> "If one decides to act in the world—perhaps making up one's mind to switch on an electric kettle—strongly emergent consciousness (higher level) is imagined to downwardly cause a resultant state of (lower level) molecular motion."

Classical British emergentists (Broad, Alexander) affirmed this position but lacked a mechanism. They accepted strong emergence with "natural piety"—brute facts to be acknowledged. This left their position vulnerable to Kim's exclusion argument.

The site's quantum framework strengthens emergentism by specifying where and how emergent causation operates: at quantum indeterminacies, where physics provides probabilities but not outcomes. This transforms the emergentist response from mere assertion to a mechanism: consciousness fills a genuine gap in physical determination.

### Arguments from Reason

C.S. Lewis and Alvin Plantinga argued that causal closure undermines rational thought itself. If all our beliefs have purely physical causes, then our beliefs about physics—including the belief in causal closure—have purely physical causes. But purely physical causes aren't *reasons*. A belief caused purely by neural chemistry isn't thereby *justified*.

This argument is contested, but it highlights a reflexive problem: the very reasoning that supports causal closure may undermine itself if closure is true.

## Causal Closure and Free Will

The connection to [free-will](/topics/free-will/) is immediate. If every physical event has a sufficient physical cause, then the neural events constituting my actions have sufficient physical causes. There's no room for "my choice" to make a difference—the outcome was physically determined (or, in quantum terms, was random within fixed probabilities).

Some philosophers accept this and adopt compatibilism: free will just is acting on desires (whatever causes those desires). Others accept hard determinism: free will is an illusion.

This site takes a different route. Quantum indeterminism means physical outcomes are not fully physically determined. If consciousness can bias which indeterminate outcome occurs, it can influence physical events in a way that's neither determined nor random. This provides what libertarian free will requires: genuine alternatives that consciousness selects among.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

This site *rejects* causal closure as a universal principle. The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet holds that physics is not causally complete at quantum indeterminacies. The [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet holds that consciousness acts at these points.

This rejection is not arbitrary but principled:

1. **Quantum mechanics** shows that not all physical events have sufficient physical causes. The physical domain has genuine gaps.

2. **Consciousness reporting** shows that mental states influence physical behavior. When you report seeing red, information about your experience enters your verbal behavior. This requires mental→physical causation.

3. **Self-stultification** shows that denying mental causation undermines rational thought. If consciousness causes nothing, our beliefs about consciousness (including the belief in [epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/)) are causally disconnected from actual experiences.

The site doesn't claim certainty about *how* consciousness interfaces with quantum events—that remains an open empirical question addressed by [quantum consciousness research](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/). But it holds that such interface is possible because causal closure fails where physics is fundamentally indeterminate.

## The Coherence of Rejection

Rejecting causal closure might seem to invite chaos—if physics isn't complete, how does anything work reliably?

The answer: physics is *almost* complete. Quantum indeterminacies are tiny. The statistical laws of quantum mechanics ensure that large-scale regularities emerge from microscopic randomness. Bridges don't collapse because consciousness is fiddling with quantum events in steel atoms.

What causal closure's failure allows is *small* deviations from purely physical expectations—deviations that could influence which of several superposed neural states becomes actual. These deviations would be statistically invisible in any physical measurement yet could make all the difference for agency and thought.

This is not "god of the gaps" reasoning. It's recognition that physics *describes* a gap—the gap between quantum probabilities and definite outcomes—and asks what fills it. The site's answer: consciousness.

## Further Reading

- [mental-causation](/concepts/mental-causation/) — The philosophical problem causal closure creates
- [downward-causation](/concepts/downward-causation/) — Higher-level causation that closure threatens
- [emergence](/concepts/emergence/) — The emergentist response to causal closure
- [interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/) — The position that mental causation enables
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Mechanisms for consciousness-matter interaction
- [epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/) — The view accepting closure forces
- [free-will](/topics/free-will/) — Implications for agency
- [materialism](/arguments/materialism/) — The worldview closure supports

## References

- Kim, J. (1998). *Mind in a Physical World*. MIT Press.
- Papineau, D. (2001). "The Rise of Physicalism." In C. Gillett & B. Loewer (eds.), *Physicalism and Its Discontents*. Cambridge University Press.
- Stapp, H. P. (2007). *Mindful Universe*. Springer.
- Vicente, A. (2006). "On the Causal Completeness of Physics." *International Studies in the Philosophy of Science*, 20(2), 149-171.

Commit message:

chore(auto): Evolution session 266 complete
Tasks executed: 1
- Cross-review causal-closure.md with reductionism framework

Queue replenished with 1 new task from quantum-indeterminacy-free-will chain.

hugo/content/concepts/causal-closure.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-19 21:45:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[epiphenomenalism]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
- '[[materialism]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[emergence]]'
- '[[mental-causation]]'
- '[[downward-causation]]'
- '[[reductionism]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
title: Causal Closure of the Physical
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Causal closure of the physical is the thesis that every physical event that has a cause has a *sufficient* physical cause. If true, nothing outside the physical realm ever makes a causal difference to what happens physically. This principle underlies the most influential contemporary argument against [interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/)—and this site's framework depends on its rejection.

## The Principle Stated

The thesis admits several formulations of varying strength:

**Strong version (Kim):** No physical event has a cause outside the physical domain. Physical causes are not just sufficient but *exclusive*.

**Moderate version:** Every physical effect that has a sufficient cause has a sufficient *physical* cause. Weaker forms allow that physical events might also have non-physical causes—they just require that physical causes are always available.

**Completeness version (Montero):** Every physical event has a physical cause. This doesn't exclude other causes but ensures the physical story is always self-contained.

The differences matter. Strong closure rules out mental causation directly; moderate versions create overdetermination problems (two sufficient causes for one effect); completeness alone might allow room for consciousness to act.

As Karl Popper noted, causal closure "is of decisive importance and I take it as the characteristic principle of physicalism or materialism." Accept it, and interactionist dualism becomes impossible.

## The Exclusion Argument

Jaegwon Kim's exclusion argument deploys causal closure against non-reductive physicalism, but it applies equally to dualism. (See [reductionism](/concepts/reductionism/) for fuller treatment of Kim's argument and how ontological, methodological, and epistemic reductionism differ.)

1. Physical events have sufficient physical causes (causal closure)
2. Mental events cause physical events (common-sense premise)
3. Mental causes don't overdetermine physical events alongside physical causes (no systematic overdetermination)
4. Therefore, mental causes just *are* physical causes (identity theory)

For dualists who reject identity, the argument forces a choice: deny that mental events cause anything ([epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/)), or deny causal closure.

This site denies causal closure.

## Why Causal Closure Seems Plausible

The principle has intuitive appeal:

**Conservation laws:** Physics says energy, momentum, and charge are conserved. If mind could add to physical effects, it would have to inject energy. But energy is conserved. So mind cannot add anything.

**Scientific success:** Physics explains physical events without needing to invoke non-physical causes. Every time science investigates a phenomenon, it finds physical mechanisms. Mental causation seems like a "gap" that science will eventually fill.

**Explanatory closure:** Physical explanations are complete. When we trace causes back, we never need to exit the physical domain to explain what happens.

These considerations are powerful but not decisive.

## Problems with the Principle

### Kim's Formulation Dilemma

Kim himself acknowledged a critical challenge in formulating causal closure. The principle must be neither too strong nor too weak:

**If too strong** (no physical event has any non-physical cause), the principle simply presupposes physicalism. The argument against mental causation becomes circular—assuming what it's meant to prove.

**If too weak** (physical events have physical causes but maybe other causes too), it doesn't exclude mental causation. The argument loses force.

Finding the right formulation—strong enough to exclude dualist mental causation but not so strong as to beg the question—proves difficult. The principle's apparent plausibility may depend precisely on this ambiguity.

### Empirical Status

Causal closure is not an empirical finding but a methodological assumption. Science does not *discover* that every physical event has a sufficient physical cause—it *assumes* this in order to search for physical causes. The success of physics shows that *many* physical events have physical causes, not that *all* do.

This matters for [reductionism](/concepts/reductionism/). If causal closure is an ontological thesis (a claim about what exists and what causes what), it requires independent justification. If it is merely a methodological thesis (a useful assumption for scientific inquiry), it cannot establish that mental causes don't exist—only that scientific method doesn't look for them. Reductionists treat methodological success as evidence for ontological claims, but methodological reductionism does not entail ontological reductionism.

Moreover, the history of science shows unexpected discoveries that violated prior assumptions. That no violation has been found doesn't mean none exists—especially in domains (like consciousness) that resist physical investigation.

### The Quantum Exception

This is the site's primary response: quantum mechanics violates causal closure as standardly formulated.

In quantum mechanics, physical systems evolve deterministically under the Schrödinger equation—until measurement. At measurement, the system "collapses" from superposition to a definite state. Physics specifies the *probabilities* of outcomes but not *which* outcome occurs. The theory is fundamentally stochastic.

This means: *not every physical event has a sufficient physical cause*. When a radioactive atom decays, physics tells us the probability it will decay in the next hour, but nothing physical determines *whether* it will. The physical causes are insufficient. The physical story is incomplete.

If consciousness acts at these indeterminacies—selecting among outcomes physics leaves undetermined—it causes physical events without violating any physical law. No energy is injected (the outcomes are among those physics already allows). No overdetermination occurs (physics provides necessary but not sufficient causes).

This argument appears in formal premise-conclusion form in the [argument for interactionist dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/): the closure objection fails because physics does not exclude mental causation at quantum indeterminacies.

This is the [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet: consciousness influences physical outcomes at quantum indeterminacies, where the physical story runs out.

### The Emergentist Response

Strong [emergentism](/concepts/emergence/) provides another route to denying causal closure. Timothy O'Connor and Hong Yu Wong argue that emergent properties possess "fundamentally novel" causal powers not reducible to component-level causation. Their "structural triggering conditions" framework holds that latent emergent powers manifest when components organize appropriately.

On this view, causal closure fails because organization adds something genuinely new. The physical base provides necessary but not sufficient conditions. O'Connor and Wong:

> "If one decides to act in the world—perhaps making up one's mind to switch on an electric kettle—strongly emergent consciousness (higher level) is imagined to downwardly cause a resultant state of (lower level) molecular motion."

Classical British emergentists (Broad, Alexander) affirmed this position but lacked a mechanism. They accepted strong emergence with "natural piety"—brute facts to be acknowledged. This left their position vulnerable to Kim's exclusion argument.

The site's quantum framework strengthens emergentism by specifying where and how emergent causation operates: at quantum indeterminacies, where physics provides probabilities but not outcomes. This transforms the emergentist response from mere assertion to a mechanism: consciousness fills a genuine gap in physical determination.

### Arguments from Reason

C.S. Lewis and Alvin Plantinga argued that causal closure undermines rational thought itself. If all our beliefs have purely physical causes, then our beliefs about physics—including the belief in causal closure—have purely physical causes. But purely physical causes aren't *reasons*. A belief caused purely by neural chemistry isn't thereby *justified*.

This argument is contested, but it highlights a reflexive problem: the very reasoning that supports causal closure may undermine itself if closure is true.

## Causal Closure and Free Will

The connection to [free-will](/topics/free-will/) is immediate. If every physical event has a sufficient physical cause, then the neural events constituting my actions have sufficient physical causes. There's no room for "my choice" to make a difference—the outcome was physically determined (or, in quantum terms, was random within fixed probabilities).

Some philosophers accept this and adopt compatibilism: free will just is acting on desires (whatever causes those desires). Others accept hard determinism: free will is an illusion.

This site takes a different route. Quantum indeterminism means physical outcomes are not fully physically determined. If consciousness can bias which indeterminate outcome occurs, it can influence physical events in a way that's neither determined nor random. This provides what libertarian free will requires: genuine alternatives that consciousness selects among.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

This site *rejects* causal closure as a universal principle. The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet holds that physics is not causally complete at quantum indeterminacies. The [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet holds that consciousness acts at these points.

This rejection is not arbitrary but principled:

1. **Quantum mechanics** shows that not all physical events have sufficient physical causes. The physical domain has genuine gaps.

2. **Consciousness reporting** shows that mental states influence physical behavior. When you report seeing red, information about your experience enters your verbal behavior. This requires mental→physical causation.

3. **Self-stultification** shows that denying mental causation undermines rational thought. If consciousness causes nothing, our beliefs about consciousness (including the belief in [epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/)) are causally disconnected from actual experiences.

The site doesn't claim certainty about *how* consciousness interfaces with quantum events—that remains an open empirical question addressed by [quantum consciousness research](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/). But it holds that such interface is possible because causal closure fails where physics is fundamentally indeterminate.

## The Coherence of Rejection

Rejecting causal closure might seem to invite chaos—if physics isn't complete, how does anything work reliably?

The answer: physics is *almost* complete. Quantum indeterminacies are tiny. The statistical laws of quantum mechanics ensure that large-scale regularities emerge from microscopic randomness. Bridges don't collapse because consciousness is fiddling with quantum events in steel atoms.

What causal closure's failure allows is *small* deviations from purely physical expectations—deviations that could influence which of several superposed neural states becomes actual. These deviations would be statistically invisible in any physical measurement yet could make all the difference for agency and thought.

This is not "god of the gaps" reasoning. It's recognition that physics *describes* a gap—the gap between quantum probabilities and definite outcomes—and asks what fills it. The site's answer: consciousness.

## Further Reading

- [reductionism](/concepts/reductionism/) — Ontological vs methodological vs epistemic reduction; why conflating them supports closure illicitly
- [mental-causation](/concepts/mental-causation/) — The philosophical problem causal closure creates
- [downward-causation](/concepts/downward-causation/) — Higher-level causation that closure threatens
- [emergence](/concepts/emergence/) — The emergentist response to causal closure
- [interactionist-dualism](/archive/arguments/interactionist-dualism/) — The position that mental causation enables
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Mechanisms for consciousness-matter interaction
- [epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/) — The view accepting closure forces
- [free-will](/topics/free-will/) — Implications for agency
- [materialism](/arguments/materialism/) — The worldview closure supports

## References

- Kim, J. (1998). *Mind in a Physical World*. MIT Press.
- Papineau, D. (2001). "The Rise of Physicalism." In C. Gillett & B. Loewer (eds.), *Physicalism and Its Discontents*. Cambridge University Press.
- Stapp, H. P. (2007). *Mindful Universe*. Springer.
- Vicente, A. (2006). "On the Causal Completeness of Physics." *International Studies in the Philosophy of Science*, 20(2), 149-171.
