hugo/content/concepts/coupling-modes.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-31
ai_modified: 2026-01-31 13:08:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[psychophysical-coupling]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[stapp-quantum-mind]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
- '[[decoherence]]'
- '[[attention]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
created: 2026-01-31
date: &id001 2026-01-31
description: 'Three ways consciousness might influence quantum outcomes: basis selection,
  timing control, or probability reweighting—with different implications for detectability
  and minimality.'
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[quantum-probability-consciousness]]'
- '[[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]'
title: Coupling Modes
topics:
- '[[mental-causation]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

If consciousness influences physical outcomes, how does it do so? The Unfinishable Map's [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet demands the "smallest possible non-physical influence"—but "smallest" depends on what kind of influence we're considering. Three candidate coupling modes exist: **basis control** (selecting what question to ask), **timing control** (selecting when collapse occurs), and **probability control** (reweighting outcome likelihoods). These are not equally minimal, and distinguishing them clarifies what "consciousness selects" actually means.

## The Three Modes

### Basis Control

In quantum mechanics, a measurement requires choosing what to measure—the "basis" or observable. Measuring position differs from measuring momentum; measuring spin along the x-axis differs from measuring along the z-axis. The choice of basis constrains which outcomes are possible and their probabilities.

**Basis control** means consciousness determines which question gets posed to a quantum system. The neural implementation: attention selects which neural representation becomes the "measured" alternative. Consciousness doesn't determine the answer—physics still provides that via Born probabilities—but shapes the possibility space by choosing the question.

Henry Stapp's model exemplifies basis control. In orthodox quantum mechanics, Stapp's "Process 1" is the choice of which observable to measure. Consciousness, through attention, determines which neural patterns become the relevant alternatives. The brain presents options; consciousness selects which set of options to actualise one from.

**Implications:**
- Born statistics remain intact for any chosen basis
- Different questions yield different probability distributions
- Influence is coarse-grained: selecting alternatives, not outcomes
- Compatible with standard quantum mechanics without modification

### Timing Control

Quantum collapse requires a trigger—something that converts superposition to definite outcome. Orthodox interpretations leave this trigger unspecified; consciousness-collapse interpretations propose that observation provides it. **Timing control** means consciousness determines when collapse occurs.

The most developed timing-control proposal is Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism. Rapid repeated observation can "freeze" a quantum state via the Zeno effect—frequent measurement prevents state evolution. Sustaining attention, on this view, maintains high observation rates, stabilising desired neural patterns against decay into alternatives.

**Implications:**
- Outcome probabilities per measurement follow Born rule
- Influence is through observation frequency, not outcome selection
- Effort phenomenology maps to sustained attention (high observation rate)
- Decoherence timescale objection applies: can observation outpace environmental decoherence?

### Probability Control

The most radical mode: consciousness directly reweights Born rule probabilities. Instead of accepting whatever outcome physics delivers at a given probability, consciousness biases the distribution—making some outcomes more likely than baseline quantum mechanics predicts.

John Eccles' proposal approximates probability control. Intention acts as a "quantum probability field," altering vesicle release likelihood via quantum tunneling. The phenomenal content of intention maps to how much the probability shifts.

**Implications:**
- Deviations from Born statistics (in affected systems)
- Potentially detectable: systematic probability shifts should appear in experiments
- Raises conservation concerns if probability shifts correlate with energy outcomes
- Most direct form of mental causation, but least "minimal"

## Why Minimality Matters

The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet exists for both philosophical and empirical reasons:

**Philosophical:** A dualist framework that posits massive mental intervention in physics loses parsimony advantages and faces the question of why physics works so well without positing mind. Minimality preserves most of physics while carving out a narrow interface.

**Empirical:** If consciousness significantly altered Born statistics, precision experiments should detect it. Quantum mechanics is extraordinarily well-tested. No systematic deviations have been found. Either consciousness doesn't affect quantum outcomes, or it does so in ways that evade detection.

These considerations favour coupling modes that are statistically "stealthy"—preserving Born statistics in measurable systems while still permitting influence at the neural interface.

## Comparative Analysis

| Mode | Born Statistics | Detection Risk | Mechanism Clarity | Phenomenological Fit |
|------|----------------|----------------|-------------------|---------------------|
| **Basis control** | Preserved | Low | High (Process 1) | Attention as question-selection |
| **Timing control** | Preserved per measurement | Low | Medium (Zeno effect) | Effort as sustained observation |
| **Probability control** | Violated | High | Low | Intention as force-like |

### Basis Control: Most "Minimal"

Basis control changes nothing about quantum mechanics' answers—only which questions get asked. Born probabilities remain intact for any chosen measurement. No deviation from standard physics is detectable because the statistics conditional on a given basis remain textbook.

This makes basis control the most minimal mode. It's also well-motivated by attention phenomenology: attending to something feels like selecting what matters, not forcing outcomes. The "executive selection" model of consciousness—choosing among pre-formed alternatives rather than generating new states—maps naturally to basis control.

**Limitation:** Basis control alone seems too weak for agency. If consciousness only picks what to measure and physics determines the outcome, how does intention actually steer behaviour? The response: basis selection constrains which outcomes are possible. Choosing to attend to "raise arm" rather than "stay still" makes arm-raising one of the actualised possibilities. Physics picks which actualised outcome occurs, but without basis selection, "raise arm" might never have been in the option set.

### Timing Control: Intermediate

Timing control preserves Born statistics for individual measurements but affects outcomes through observation rate. High observation frequency (sustained attention) can Zeno-stabilise desired patterns; low frequency allows them to decay.

This is intermediate in minimality. Each measurement obeys Born rule, so no single-trial deviation is detectable. But systematic patterns might emerge: do attention-trained subjects show different neural dynamics than untrained ones? The prediction is yes—but the effect shows up as attention-correlated pattern stability, not as Born-rule violation.

**Limitation:** Decoherence timescales challenge timing control. If environmental interaction collapses superpositions faster than attention can intervene, the Zeno mechanism fails. Simulations (Araujo et al., 2014) suggest the Zeno effect breaks down at brain-relevant timescales—though these calculations are contested.

### Probability Control: Least "Minimal"

Probability control directly changes outcome likelihoods. If consciousness can make a 50-50 outcome occur at 60-40, this is detectable in principle: enough trials reveal statistical deviation.

Random number generator (RNG) experiments have attempted to detect such deviations. Results are mixed—some meta-analyses find small effects, others attribute these to publication bias. No consensus exists that consciousness reliably biases external quantum systems.

**Limitation:** Probability control faces a stealth problem. If it occurs only in brains, why? What makes neural quantum events susceptible to mental influence while laboratory quantum events are not? The "brain specialness" boundary—[why consciousness only affects integrated neural systems](/questions/consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns/#brain-specialness)—provides a principled answer, but probability control within brains still risks in-principle detectability via careful measurement.

## The Map's Position

The Unfinishable Map does not commit to a single coupling mode, but the tenets favour basis and timing control over probability control:

1. **Minimal Quantum Interaction** demands the smallest deviation from standard physics. Basis control deviates least (no change to quantum mechanics), timing control next (Zeno effect is orthodox physics), probability control most (requires modified Born rule in affected systems).

2. **Bidirectional Interaction** requires consciousness to actually affect outcomes, ruling out pure epiphenomenalism. All three modes satisfy this if they work—the question is which can work while remaining minimal.

3. **No Many Worlds** implies collapse is real and outcomes are genuinely selected. This is compatible with all three modes but frames the question: when collapse happens, does consciousness influence what collapses to (probability), when it collapses (timing), or what the collapsing alternatives are (basis)?

The most promising synthesis: **basis control sets the alternatives; timing control stabilises preferred patterns; probability control, if present at all, operates at the margin**. Consciousness primarily shapes the option space (basis) and sustains attention on relevant alternatives (timing), with outcome selection mostly following Born statistics.

## Open Questions

**Can modes combine?** Perhaps basis control is primary and timing control modulates it—attention selects alternatives (basis) and effort sustains them (timing). Probability control might be negligible or absent.

**Does brain specialness resolve the detection problem?** If coupling is restricted to attention-integrated neural systems, probability control might be locally significant yet globally undetectable. But "locally significant" still means some measurable effect should exist in brain tissue under the right conditions.

**What about decoherence?** If decoherence determines basis (einselection) faster than consciousness can, basis control may operate at the wrong level. Consciousness might select among decoherence-selected alternatives—a classical-level basis control—rather than quantum-level basis selection.

**Is there empirical leverage?** Timing control predicts attention-correlated neural pattern stability. Probability control predicts deviations from baseline quantum statistics in brain tissue. Basis control is hardest to test directly, since it changes what's measured rather than measurement results.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The coupling modes taxonomy connects directly to the Map's foundational commitments:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: All three modes presuppose that consciousness is distinct from and can influence physical processes. The question is how influence is structured, not whether it exists.

**[Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction)**: This tenet decisively favours basis and timing control. "Minimal" means preserving as much of physics as possible while permitting influence. Probability control preserves least; basis control preserves most.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: The coupling mode specifies how bidirectional interaction is implemented. Without specifying a mode, "consciousness selects" remains metaphorical. With mode specification, the claim becomes: consciousness selects which question to ask (basis), when to ask it (timing), or how answers are weighted (probability).

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)**: Rejecting MWI means one outcome becomes actual and others don't. The coupling mode specifies how consciousness participates in this actualisation—not whether it does (that's a tenet) but through what mechanism.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)**: Critics might invoke parsimony against any coupling mode. But parsimony applies within comparable explanatory scope. A theory that ignores consciousness's causal efficacy isn't simpler—it's incomplete. The question is which mode best balances explanatory power with physical minimality.

The taxonomy tightens the Map's framework by replacing vague "selection" language with specific, distinguishable alternatives. This makes commitments clearer and objections more precise.

## Further Reading

- [psychophysical-coupling](/concepts/psychophysical-coupling/) — The broader framework these modes fit within
- [stapp-quantum-mind](/concepts/stapp-quantum-mind/) — Detailed treatment of basis and timing control
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Overview of quantum-mind theories
- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — Why outcomes need explanation
- [consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns](/questions/consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns/) — What selection actually selects
- [quantum-probability-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-probability-consciousness/) — How Born probabilities relate to consciousness
- [attention](/concepts/attention/) — The phenomenal variable most tied to coupling
- [mental-effort](/concepts/mental-effort/) — Effort as timing/observation rate control

## References

1. Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
2. Stapp, H.P. "Quantum Interactive Dualism: An Alternative to Materialism." https://www-physics.lbl.gov/~stapp/QID.pdf
3. Eccles, J.C. (1994). *How the Self Controls Its Brain*. Springer.
4. Araujo et al. (2014). "Monte Carlo Simulation of Quantum Zeno Effect in the Brain." https://ar5iv.labs.arxiv.org/html/1412.4741
5. Zurek, W.H. (2003). "Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical." *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 75(3), 715-775.
6. Chalmers, D.J. & McQueen, K.J. (2022). "Consciousness and the Collapse of the Wave Function." In S. Gao (ed.), *Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics*. Oxford University Press.

Commit message:

feat(expand-topic): add concepts/attentional-economics.md
- Develops "agency = attentional economics" thesis from outer-review task
- Core claim: freedom scales with attentional skill; attention training is metaphysically agency-enhancing
- Economic framing: ~10 bits/second bandwidth, allocation, investment, returns
- Links attention to quantum Zeno stabilisation of neural patterns
- Connects to attention-as-interface, voluntary-attention, meditation-and-consciousness-modes
- 2022 words, within soft threshold

hugo/content/concepts/coupling-modes.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-31
ai_modified: 2026-01-31 17:18:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[psychophysical-coupling]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[stapp-quantum-mind]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
- '[[decoherence]]'
- '[[attention]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
- '[[attention-as-interface]]'
- '[[voluntary-attention]]'
- '[[agent-causation]]'
created: 2026-01-31
date: &id001 2026-01-31
description: 'Three ways consciousness might influence quantum outcomes: basis selection,
  timing control, or probability reweighting—with different implications for detectability
  and minimality.'
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-31 17:18:00+00:00
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[quantum-probability-consciousness]]'
- '[[consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns]]'
title: Coupling Modes
topics:
- '[[mental-causation]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

If consciousness influences physical outcomes, how does it do so? The Unfinishable Map's [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet demands the "smallest possible non-physical influence"—but "smallest" depends on what kind of influence we're considering. Three candidate coupling modes exist: **basis control** (selecting what question to ask), **timing control** (selecting when collapse occurs), and **probability control** (reweighting outcome likelihoods). These are not equally minimal, and distinguishing them clarifies what "consciousness selects" actually means.

## The Three Modes

### Basis Control

In quantum mechanics, a measurement requires choosing what to measure—the "basis" or observable. Measuring position differs from measuring momentum; measuring spin along the x-axis differs from measuring along the z-axis. The choice of basis constrains which outcomes are possible and their probabilities.

**Basis control** means consciousness determines which question gets posed to a quantum system. The neural implementation: attention selects which neural representation becomes the "measured" alternative. Consciousness doesn't determine the answer—physics still provides that via Born probabilities—but shapes the possibility space by choosing the question.

Henry Stapp's model exemplifies basis control. In orthodox quantum mechanics, Stapp's "Process 1" is the choice of which observable to measure. Consciousness, through attention, determines which neural patterns become the relevant alternatives. The brain presents options; consciousness selects which set of options to actualise one from.

**Implications:**
- Born statistics remain intact for any chosen basis
- Different questions yield different probability distributions
- Influence is coarse-grained: selecting alternatives, not outcomes
- Compatible with standard quantum mechanics without modification

### Timing Control

Quantum collapse requires a trigger—something that converts superposition to definite outcome. Orthodox interpretations leave this trigger unspecified; consciousness-collapse interpretations propose that observation provides it. **Timing control** means consciousness determines when collapse occurs.

The most developed timing-control proposal is Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism. Rapid repeated observation can "freeze" a quantum state via the Zeno effect—frequent measurement prevents state evolution. Sustaining attention, on this view, maintains high observation rates, stabilising desired neural patterns against decay into alternatives.

**Implications:**
- Outcome probabilities per measurement follow Born rule
- Influence is through observation frequency, not outcome selection
- Effort phenomenology maps to sustained attention (high observation rate)
- Decoherence timescale objection applies: can observation outpace environmental decoherence?

### Probability Control

The most radical mode: consciousness directly reweights Born rule probabilities. Instead of accepting whatever outcome physics delivers at a given probability, consciousness biases the distribution—making some outcomes more likely than baseline quantum mechanics predicts.

John Eccles' psychon-dendron theory approximates probability control. In his framework, mental units ("psychons") couple to neural structures ("dendrons") and alter neurotransmitter vesicle release probability through quantum tunneling effects. The intensity of intention maps to the magnitude of probability modulation.

**Implications:**
- Deviations from Born statistics (in affected systems)
- Potentially detectable: systematic probability shifts should appear in experiments
- Raises conservation concerns if probability shifts correlate with energy outcomes
- Most direct form of mental causation, but least "minimal"

## Why Minimality Matters

The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet exists for both philosophical and empirical reasons:

**Philosophical:** A dualist framework that posits massive mental intervention in physics loses parsimony advantages and faces the question of why physics works so well without positing mind. Minimality preserves most of physics while carving out a narrow interface.

**Empirical:** If consciousness significantly altered Born statistics, precision experiments should detect it. Quantum mechanics is extraordinarily well-tested. No systematic deviations have been found. Either consciousness doesn't affect quantum outcomes, or it does so in ways that evade detection.

These considerations favour coupling modes that are statistically "stealthy"—preserving Born statistics in measurable systems while still permitting influence at the neural interface. A methodological tension arises: if the preferred modes make predictions identical to standard physics, what distinguishes "consciousness selects" from "physics determines"? The answer lies in explanatory adequacy—the question is whether selection provides resources for understanding agency and phenomenology that pure physics lacks, not whether it generates novel statistical predictions.

## Comparative Analysis

| Mode | Born Statistics | Detection Risk | Mechanism Clarity | Phenomenological Fit |
|------|----------------|----------------|-------------------|---------------------|
| **Basis control** | Preserved | Low | High (Process 1) | Attention as question-selection |
| **Timing control** | Preserved per measurement | Low | Medium (Zeno effect) | Effort as sustained observation |
| **Probability control** | Violated | High | Low | Intention as force-like |

### Basis Control: Most "Minimal"

Basis control changes nothing about quantum mechanics' answers—only which questions get asked. Born probabilities remain intact for any chosen measurement. No deviation from standard physics is detectable because the statistics conditional on a given basis remain textbook.

This makes basis control the most minimal mode. It's also well-motivated by attention phenomenology: attending to something feels like selecting what matters, not forcing outcomes. The "executive selection" model of consciousness—choosing among pre-formed alternatives rather than generating new states—maps naturally to basis control.

**Limitation:** Basis control alone seems too weak for agency. If consciousness only picks what to measure and physics determines the outcome, how does intention actually steer behaviour? The response: basis selection constrains which outcomes are possible. Choosing to attend to "raise arm" rather than "stay still" makes arm-raising one of the actualised possibilities. Physics picks which actualised outcome occurs, but without basis selection, "raise arm" might never have been in the option set.

### Timing Control: Intermediate

Timing control preserves Born statistics for individual measurements but affects outcomes through observation rate. High observation frequency (sustained attention) can Zeno-stabilise desired patterns; low frequency allows them to decay.

This is intermediate in minimality. Each measurement obeys Born rule, so no single-trial deviation is detectable. But systematic patterns might emerge: do attention-trained subjects show different neural dynamics than untrained ones? The prediction is yes—but the effect shows up as attention-correlated pattern stability, not as Born-rule violation.

**Limitation:** Decoherence timescales present a serious challenge to timing control. Tegmark calculated decoherence times of 10⁻¹³ to 10⁻²⁰ seconds for neural systems—far faster than the millisecond timescales of neural processing. If environmental interaction collapses superpositions this quickly, there may be no coherent quantum state for attention to observe. Hameroff and colleagues disputed these calculations, obtaining coherence times seven orders of magnitude longer (10⁻⁵ seconds), but even this remains far shorter than neural integration times. Monte Carlo simulations (Araujo et al., 2014) suggest the Zeno effect breaks down for timescales exceeding brain decoherence time. The mechanism might still operate if consciousness biases outcomes *after* decoherence, at the point of definite-outcome emergence—but this shifts to a less exotic (though still causally efficacious) form of selection.

### Probability Control: Least "Minimal"

Probability control directly changes outcome likelihoods. If consciousness can make a 50-50 outcome occur at 60-40, this is detectable in principle: enough trials reveal statistical deviation.

Random number generator (RNG) experiments have attempted to detect such deviations. Results are mixed—some meta-analyses find small effects, others attribute these to publication bias. No consensus exists that consciousness reliably biases external quantum systems.

**Limitation:** Probability control faces a stealth problem. If it occurs only in brains, why? What makes neural quantum events susceptible to mental influence while laboratory quantum events are not? The "brain specialness" boundary—[why consciousness only affects integrated neural systems](/questions/consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns/#brain-specialness)—provides a principled answer, but probability control within brains still risks in-principle detectability via careful measurement.

## The Map's Position

The Unfinishable Map does not commit to a single coupling mode, but the tenets favour basis and timing control over probability control:

1. **Minimal Quantum Interaction** demands the smallest deviation from standard physics. Basis control deviates least (no change to quantum mechanics), timing control next (Zeno effect is orthodox physics), probability control most (requires modified Born rule in affected systems).

2. **Bidirectional Interaction** requires consciousness to actually affect outcomes, ruling out pure epiphenomenalism. All three modes satisfy this if they work—the question is which can work while remaining minimal.

3. **No Many Worlds** implies collapse is real and outcomes are genuinely selected. This is compatible with all three modes but frames the question: when collapse happens, does consciousness influence what collapses to (probability), when it collapses (timing), or what the collapsing alternatives are (basis)?

The most promising synthesis: **basis control sets the alternatives; timing control stabilises preferred patterns; probability control, if present at all, operates at the margin**. Consciousness primarily shapes the option space (basis) and sustains attention on relevant alternatives (timing), with outcome selection mostly following Born statistics.

## Open Questions

**Can modes combine?** Perhaps basis control is primary and timing control modulates it—attention selects alternatives (basis) and effort sustains them (timing). Probability control might be negligible or absent.

**Does brain specialness resolve the detection problem?** If coupling is restricted to attention-integrated neural systems, probability control might be locally significant yet globally undetectable. But "locally significant" still means some measurable effect should exist in brain tissue under the right conditions.

**What about decoherence?** If decoherence determines basis (einselection) faster than consciousness can, basis control may operate at the wrong level. Consciousness might select among decoherence-selected alternatives—a classical-level basis control—rather than quantum-level basis selection.

**Is there empirical leverage?** Timing control predicts attention-correlated neural pattern stability. Probability control predicts deviations from baseline quantum statistics in brain tissue. Basis control is hardest to test directly, since it changes what's measured rather than measurement results.

**What would refute the preferred modes?** The basis/timing control framework would face serious challenge if: (1) attention-correlated pattern stability showed no systematic relationship in well-controlled studies; (2) meditation training produced no measurable changes in neural dynamics despite subjective reports of increased attentional control; (3) neuroplasticity occurred identically with and without conscious engagement; or (4) the phenomenology of effort proved inconsistent across trained observers.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The coupling modes taxonomy connects directly to the Map's foundational commitments:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: All three modes presuppose that consciousness is distinct from and can influence physical processes. The question is how influence is structured, not whether it exists.

**[Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction)**: This tenet decisively favours basis and timing control. "Minimal" means preserving as much of physics as possible while permitting influence. Probability control preserves least; basis control preserves most.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: The coupling mode specifies how bidirectional interaction is implemented. Without specifying a mode, "consciousness selects" remains metaphorical. With mode specification, the claim becomes: consciousness selects which question to ask (basis), when to ask it (timing), or how answers are weighted (probability).

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)**: Rejecting MWI means one outcome becomes actual and others don't. The coupling mode specifies how consciousness participates in this actualisation—not whether it does (that's a tenet) but through what mechanism.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)**: Critics might invoke parsimony against any coupling mode. But parsimony applies within comparable explanatory scope. A theory that ignores consciousness's causal efficacy isn't simpler—it's incomplete. The question is which mode best balances explanatory power with physical minimality.

The taxonomy tightens the Map's framework by replacing vague "selection" language with specific, distinguishable alternatives. This makes commitments clearer and objections more precise.

## Further Reading

- [psychophysical-coupling](/concepts/psychophysical-coupling/) — The broader framework these modes fit within
- [stapp-quantum-mind](/concepts/stapp-quantum-mind/) — Detailed treatment of basis and timing control
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Overview of quantum-mind theories
- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — Why outcomes need explanation
- [consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns](/questions/consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns/) — What selection actually selects
- [quantum-probability-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-probability-consciousness/) — How Born probabilities relate to consciousness
- [attention](/concepts/attention/) — The phenomenal variable most tied to coupling
- [mental-effort](/concepts/mental-effort/) — Effort as timing/observation rate control
- [attention-as-interface](/concepts/attention-as-interface/) — How attention functions as the mind-matter interface
- [voluntary-attention](/concepts/voluntary-attention/) — Neural signatures distinguishing willed from instructed attention
- [agent-causation](/concepts/agent-causation/) — The free will implications of conscious selection

## References

1. Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
2. Stapp, H.P. "Quantum Interactive Dualism: An Alternative to Materialism." https://www-physics.lbl.gov/~stapp/QID.pdf
3. Eccles, J.C. (1994). *How the Self Controls Its Brain*. Springer.
4. Araujo et al. (2014). "Monte Carlo Simulation of Quantum Zeno Effect in the Brain." https://ar5iv.labs.arxiv.org/html/1412.4741
5. Zurek, W.H. (2003). "Decoherence, einselection, and the quantum origins of the classical." *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 75(3), 715-775.
6. Chalmers, D.J. & McQueen, K.J. (2022). "Consciousness and the Collapse of the Wave Function." In S. Gao (ed.), *Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics*. Oxford University Press.
