hugo/content/concepts/duration.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-14 17:45:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[materialism]]'
- '[[collapse-and-time]]'
- '[[neurophenomenology]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[consciousness-time-perception-2026-01-14]]'
title: Duration (Durée)
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Henri Bergson's concept of *durée* (duration) names the qualitative experience of time as consciousness lives it—fundamentally different from clock time or the spatialized time of physics. When you listen to a melody, you don't experience a succession of separate notes arranged along a timeline. You experience the melody *as a whole*, with each note permeated by the ones before and reaching toward those to come. This flowing, interpenetrating, qualitative time is durée.

Bergson argued that modern science systematically misunderstands time by spatializing it—treating moments as points on a line, like beads on a string. This representation is useful for measurement but misses what time actually is for a conscious being. Durée cannot be measured because it cannot be divided without destroying what it is. Cut a melody into separate notes and you have frequencies, not music.

This matters for consciousness studies because durée may name exactly what physical descriptions leave out. If Bergson is right, the "missing link" in consciousness theories—their failure to explain experienced duration—is not a gap to be filled but evidence of an irreducible dimension that science's spatialized time cannot capture.

## Duration vs. Spatialized Time

Bergson distinguishes two ways of apprehending time:

**Spatialized time** treats moments as positions in a medium. We represent 3:00 PM as a point on a clock face, distinct from and external to 3:01 PM. Scientific time is homogeneous—each moment is interchangeable with any other. It's measured by comparing with standard intervals (seconds, vibrations of atoms). This time can be graphed, calculated, quantified.

**Duration** is time as consciousness experiences it. In durée, the past is not gone but lives in the present; the future is not absent but already colors current experience. States don't sit beside each other like objects in space—they interpenetrate, each permeated by the others. An hour of waiting feels different from an hour of absorption. Duration is heterogeneous, qualitative, indivisible.

The distinction parallels that between external and internal. We can observe a clock from outside, measure its ticks, graph its motion. But we cannot step outside our own duration to observe it externally. We live it. Any attempt to represent duration spatially already transforms it into something else.

Bergson wrote: "Time is invention or it is nothing at all." Real time—durée—is creative, bringing genuine novelty. Spatialized time merely rearranges what already exists. The physicist's equations are time-reversible; durée is not. You cannot un-hear a melody.

## Qualitative Multiplicity

Bergson's key technical concept is "qualitative multiplicity"—unity in difference without juxtaposition. In ordinary multiplicity, elements are distinct and countable: five apples, three chairs. Each unit is external to the others. In qualitative multiplicity, elements interpenetrate while remaining distinguishable. They form a whole where each part is coloured by every other.

A musical phrase exemplifies this. The notes don't simply succeed each other—each note is heard *in light of* what came before and *in anticipation of* what follows. The C at the beginning of a cadence is not the same experience as a C in isolation. Its meaning, its felt quality, depends on its place in the whole. Yet the notes don't fuse into undifferentiated unity; they remain distinguishable. This is qualitative multiplicity.

Consciousness, Bergson argues, is fundamentally this kind of multiplicity. Mental states interpenetrate. Your current experience is suffused with memories, expectations, moods—not as separate contents added together but as dimensions of a unified experiential field. When you feel nostalgic, the past is not recalled from storage; it colours the present moment from within.

This challenges both associationist psychology (which treats mind as distinct ideas linked by association) and computational approaches (which treat cognition as manipulation of discrete symbols). For Bergson, consciousness is not composed of separable elements but is a continuous, interpenetrating flow.

## Duration and Free Will

Bergson connected durée directly to [free will](/topics/free-will/). His first major work, *Time and Free Will* (1889), argued that the apparent conflict between freedom and determinism rests on a confusion—treating lived duration as if it were spatialized time.

Determinism assumes that mental states are discrete, separable, and subject to causal law: state A causes state B with the same necessity as billiard ball A causes billiard ball B to move. But if mental states interpenetrate in qualitative multiplicity, this model fails. There's no distinct "state A" to serve as cause. The whole of one's past converges in each moment, not as a sum of separate influences but as an indivisible movement.

A free act, for Bergson, is one that emerges from the whole self—from the full depth of one's duration. Unfree acts are those where we act superficially, from habit or social convention, without engaging our genuine selves. Freedom is not arbitrary choice between pre-defined options but creative expression of who we are becoming.

This connects to the site's [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet. If consciousness genuinely influences the physical world, it does so in time—in durée. The creative novelty Bergson attributes to duration is precisely the opening where consciousness might exercise causal power. Determinism fails not because events are random but because lived time is creative rather than merely repetitive.

## The "Missing Link" in Consciousness Theories

Contemporary researchers have identified a critical gap: major theories of consciousness fail to account for experienced duration. Integrated Information Theory (IIT) and Global Workspace Theory (GNWT) focus on "functional moments"—brief processing epochs of 100-300 milliseconds. But experienced time extends to seconds. When you hear a sentence, your experience spans far longer than a functional moment. What accounts for this?

Kent and Wittmann (2021) call this "one of the core issues in theories of consciousness." The theories explain what happens in brief windows but not how these windows integrate into the flowing duration humans actually experience. The "stream of consciousness" is treated as a metaphor rather than a phenomenon requiring explanation.

Bergson's framework suggests why this gap persists. The theories spatialize time—treating consciousness as a sequence of discrete states, each explained by conditions at that moment. But durée is not a sequence of states. It's an indivisible flow where each moment contains the whole past and reaches toward the future. Explaining discrete moments cannot explain duration because duration is not made of discrete moments.

This supports the [Dualism](/tenets/#dualism) tenet. If mainstream theories systematically fail to explain experienced duration, perhaps this is because duration is irreducible to physical processes. The gap is not a problem to be solved by better neuroscience but evidence that something escapes physical description altogether.

## Contemplative Access to Durée

[Neurophenomenology](/concepts/neurophenomenology/) provides empirical support for Bergson's claims about duration. Long-term meditators report systematic access to the temporal microstructure of experience—what Bergson called the interpenetrating flow of past, present, and future.

**The specious present at fine scales**: Buddhist traditions describe *khanika* (momentariness)—experience arising and passing in rapid succession. Ordinary awareness blurs these transitions; contemplative training discloses them. This is durée observed directly: the qualitative multiplicity Bergson described becomes phenomenally available to trained attention.

**Husserl's retention-primal impression-protention**: Phenomenologist Edmund Husserl analyzed time-consciousness into retention (the just-past echoing in the now), primal impression (the present moment), and protention (anticipation of what's coming). Contemplative practice reveals this structure experientially. Meditators report accessing the "specious present" at temporal scales normally below conscious threshold—the very interpenetration that constitutes durée.

**Microphenomenology**: Claire Petitmengin's microphenomenological interview techniques elicit fine-grained descriptions of brief moments of experience. The findings consistently reveal micro-dynamics invisible to casual introspection: subtle rises and falls, shifts between focal and peripheral awareness, the "grain" of temporal flow. These are not theoretical constructs but phenomenal data—evidence that durée is not merely a philosophical concept but a describable structure of experience.

**Cessation and the absence of duration**: Perhaps most striking, advanced meditators can voluntarily enter *nirodha samapatti*—cessation of perception and feeling. In this state, subjective time stops entirely. When meditators emerge, they report that no time seemed to pass—not shortened time, but the complete absence of temporal experience. This provides a kind of negative evidence for durée: when durée stops, there is no experience at all. Duration is not a feature of experience but its fundamental medium.

These findings strengthen Bergson's case. Durée is not a metaphysical hypothesis but a phenomenal structure that trained observers can access and describe. The "missing link" in consciousness theories—their failure to explain experienced duration—may persist because theorists ignore the systematic first-person research that contemplative traditions have developed over millennia.

## Embodied Duration

Recent research connects time experience to bodily rhythms. The insula processes interoceptive signals—heartbeat, breathing, gut feelings. These rhythms create a kind of internal clock, grounding temporal experience in bodily life. Duration may be essentially embodied.

This has implications for [AI consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/). If time experience requires embodiment—if durée is not abstract but lived through a body—then disembodied AI systems may be categorically incapable of temporal experience. It's not that they process time incorrectly but that they don't live time at all. Processing timestamps is not experiencing duration.

Bergson anticipated this in his emphasis on *élan vital*—the vital impulse that drives evolutionary creativity. Duration for Bergson is not a property of abstract mind but of living, evolving organisms. The interpenetration of past and present that constitutes durée requires the kind of organic memory that embeds history in bodily structure. A living body carries its past in its tissues; a computer carries data in storage.

## Durée and Quantum Collapse

A speculative but intriguing connection: Bergson's qualitative multiplicity resembles quantum superposition. Before measurement, a quantum system exists in superposition—not a definite state but all possible states interpenetrating. Upon measurement, this multiplicity collapses to a single outcome.

Duration as Bergson describes it is similarly a multiplicity that doesn't reduce to definite, separable states. The whole past is present, the future already anticipated, in an interpenetrating whole. Perhaps the "collapse" that creates each present moment is analogous to quantum collapse—or perhaps identical with it.

The [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) connection deepens this speculation. If consciousness participates in quantum collapse (as the site's framework proposes), and if collapse introduces the arrow of time, then durée may be phenomenologically apprehending what physics mathematically describes. What Bergson called the irreversibility of lived time—the way you cannot un-hear a melody—may reflect the deeper irreversibility of collapse itself. Each conscious moment doesn't just happen *in* time; it helps constitute time's direction by selecting among quantum possibilities.

Time-symmetric interpretations offer an even more striking parallel. In frameworks like the Two-State Vector Formalism, collapse isn't located at a moment but is the satisfaction of constraints across time—past and future boundary conditions aligning. This resonates with Bergson's description of durée as interpenetrating past, present, and future. If consciousness's selection operates atemporally (determining which "transactions" complete rather than pushing events at instants), then the flowing character of durée may be the phenomenal expression of this atemporal selection viewed from within the temporal structure it creates.

This connects to the site's [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet. If durée is the lived reality of quantum possibility, then consciousness experiencing time might be consciousness selecting among superposed states. The creative novelty Bergson attributes to duration could be the phenomenal character of quantum collapse as experienced from within. Where physics sees measurement outcomes, consciousness experiences the flowing present.

The speculation remains unproven. But it suggests that the "mystery" of time experience and the "mystery" of quantum measurement might be related—perhaps even the same mystery from different perspectives. Durée would name what collapse *feels like* from the inside.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Bergson's durée aligns with multiple site tenets:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: Duration as Bergson describes it is irreducible to physical description. Spatializing time transforms it into something else. The qualitative character of experienced duration—the way it feels to live through time rather than merely exist at successive instants—is precisely what physical descriptions cannot capture.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Durée is creative, bringing genuine novelty. Free acts emerge from the whole self acting in time. This creative causation is what Bergson means by freedom—and it's what the site means by consciousness influencing physical outcomes.

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)**: Duration is lived by a continuous self persisting through time. In many-worlds, there's no such self—just branching copies. Bergson's interpenetrating duration presupposes the kind of temporal identity that many-worlds dissolves.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occam)**: Spatialized time seems simpler—measurable, quantifiable, amenable to equation. But this simplicity is achieved by ignoring qualitative duration. The apparently simpler picture misses the phenomenon entirely. Bergson's framework is more complex but captures what scientific time systematically excludes.

## Further Reading

- [neurophenomenology](/concepts/neurophenomenology/) — Contemplative science and access to temporal microstructure
- [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) — How quantum collapse may constitute time's arrow
- [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/) — The specious present and neuroscience of time
- [free-will](/topics/free-will/) — How temporal structure relates to agency
- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The explanatory gap that durée parallels
- [ai-consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/) — Why disembodied systems may lack temporal experience
- [consciousness-time-perception-2026-01-14](/research/consciousness-time-perception-2026-01-14/) — Research notes on this topic

## References

- Bergson, H. (1889/2001). *Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness*. Dover. (Original: *Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience*)
- Bergson, H. (1896/1988). *Matter and Memory*. Zone Books.
- Bergson, H. (1907/1998). *Creative Evolution*. Dover.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Henri Bergson. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/bergson/
- Kent, L. & Wittmann, M. (2021). Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness. *Neuroscience of Consciousness*, 2021(2), niab011.
- Craig, A.D. (2009). How do you feel—now? The anterior insula and human awareness. *Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, 10(1), 59-70.
- James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Henry Holt.

Commit message:

chore(auto): Evolution session 242 complete
Tasks executed: 1
- expand-topic: consciousness and creativity

Queue replenished: +1 task (consciousness-creativity article from research chain)
Convergence: Concepts 95 → 96
All links validated.

hugo/content/concepts/duration.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-14 17:45:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[materialism]]'
- '[[collapse-and-time]]'
- '[[neurophenomenology]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[consciousness-time-perception-2026-01-14]]'
title: Duration (Durée)
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Henri Bergson's concept of *durée* (duration) names the qualitative experience of time as consciousness lives it—fundamentally different from clock time or the spatialized time of physics. When you listen to a melody, you don't experience a succession of separate notes arranged along a timeline. You experience the melody *as a whole*, with each note permeated by the ones before and reaching toward those to come. This flowing, interpenetrating, qualitative time is durée.

Bergson argued that modern science systematically misunderstands time by spatializing it—treating moments as points on a line, like beads on a string. This representation is useful for measurement but misses what time actually is for a conscious being. Durée cannot be measured because it cannot be divided without destroying what it is. Cut a melody into separate notes and you have frequencies, not music.

This matters for consciousness studies because durée may name exactly what physical descriptions leave out. If Bergson is right, the "missing link" in consciousness theories—their failure to explain experienced duration—is not a gap to be filled but evidence of an irreducible dimension that science's spatialized time cannot capture.

## Duration vs. Spatialized Time

Bergson distinguishes two ways of apprehending time:

**Spatialized time** treats moments as positions in a medium. We represent 3:00 PM as a point on a clock face, distinct from and external to 3:01 PM. Scientific time is homogeneous—each moment is interchangeable with any other. It's measured by comparing with standard intervals (seconds, vibrations of atoms). This time can be graphed, calculated, quantified.

**Duration** is time as consciousness experiences it. In durée, the past is not gone but lives in the present; the future is not absent but already colors current experience. States don't sit beside each other like objects in space—they interpenetrate, each permeated by the others. An hour of waiting feels different from an hour of absorption. Duration is heterogeneous, qualitative, indivisible.

The distinction parallels that between external and internal. We can observe a clock from outside, measure its ticks, graph its motion. But we cannot step outside our own duration to observe it externally. We live it. Any attempt to represent duration spatially already transforms it into something else.

Bergson wrote: "Time is invention or it is nothing at all." Real time—durée—is creative, bringing genuine novelty. Spatialized time merely rearranges what already exists. The physicist's equations are time-reversible; durée is not. You cannot un-hear a melody.

## Qualitative Multiplicity

Bergson's key technical concept is "qualitative multiplicity"—unity in difference without juxtaposition. In ordinary multiplicity, elements are distinct and countable: five apples, three chairs. Each unit is external to the others. In qualitative multiplicity, elements interpenetrate while remaining distinguishable. They form a whole where each part is coloured by every other.

A musical phrase exemplifies this. The notes don't simply succeed each other—each note is heard *in light of* what came before and *in anticipation of* what follows. The C at the beginning of a cadence is not the same experience as a C in isolation. Its meaning, its felt quality, depends on its place in the whole. Yet the notes don't fuse into undifferentiated unity; they remain distinguishable. This is qualitative multiplicity.

Consciousness, Bergson argues, is fundamentally this kind of multiplicity. Mental states interpenetrate. Your current experience is suffused with memories, expectations, moods—not as separate contents added together but as dimensions of a unified experiential field. When you feel nostalgic, the past is not recalled from storage; it colours the present moment from within.

This challenges both associationist psychology (which treats mind as distinct ideas linked by association) and computational approaches (which treat cognition as manipulation of discrete symbols). For Bergson, consciousness is not composed of separable elements but is a continuous, interpenetrating flow.

## Duration and Free Will

Bergson connected durée directly to [free will](/topics/free-will/). His first major work, *Time and Free Will* (1889), argued that the apparent conflict between freedom and determinism rests on a confusion—treating lived duration as if it were spatialized time.

Determinism assumes that mental states are discrete, separable, and subject to causal law: state A causes state B with the same necessity as billiard ball A causes billiard ball B to move. But if mental states interpenetrate in qualitative multiplicity, this model fails. There's no distinct "state A" to serve as cause. The whole of one's past converges in each moment, not as a sum of separate influences but as an indivisible movement.

A free act, for Bergson, is one that emerges from the whole self—from the full depth of one's duration. Unfree acts are those where we act superficially, from habit or social convention, without engaging our genuine selves. Freedom is not arbitrary choice between pre-defined options but creative expression of who we are becoming.

This connects to the site's [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet. If consciousness genuinely influences the physical world, it does so in time—in durée. The creative novelty Bergson attributes to duration is precisely the opening where consciousness might exercise causal power. Determinism fails not because events are random but because lived time is creative rather than merely repetitive.

## The "Missing Link" in Consciousness Theories

Contemporary researchers have identified a critical gap: major theories of consciousness fail to account for experienced duration. Integrated Information Theory (IIT) and Global Workspace Theory (GNWT) focus on "functional moments"—brief processing epochs of 100-300 milliseconds. But experienced time extends to seconds. When you hear a sentence, your experience spans far longer than a functional moment. What accounts for this?

Kent and Wittmann (2021) call this "one of the core issues in theories of consciousness." The theories explain what happens in brief windows but not how these windows integrate into the flowing duration humans actually experience. The "stream of consciousness" is treated as a metaphor rather than a phenomenon requiring explanation.

Bergson's framework suggests why this gap persists. The theories spatialize time—treating consciousness as a sequence of discrete states, each explained by conditions at that moment. But durée is not a sequence of states. It's an indivisible flow where each moment contains the whole past and reaches toward the future. Explaining discrete moments cannot explain duration because duration is not made of discrete moments.

This supports the [Dualism](/tenets/#dualism) tenet. If mainstream theories systematically fail to explain experienced duration, perhaps this is because duration is irreducible to physical processes. The gap is not a problem to be solved by better neuroscience but evidence that something escapes physical description altogether.

## Contemplative Access to Durée

[Neurophenomenology](/concepts/neurophenomenology/) provides empirical support for Bergson's claims about duration. Long-term meditators report systematic access to the temporal microstructure of experience—what Bergson called the interpenetrating flow of past, present, and future.

**The specious present at fine scales**: Buddhist traditions describe *khanika* (momentariness)—experience arising and passing in rapid succession. Ordinary awareness blurs these transitions; contemplative training discloses them. This is durée observed directly: the qualitative multiplicity Bergson described becomes phenomenally available to trained attention.

**Husserl's retention-primal impression-protention**: Phenomenologist Edmund Husserl analyzed time-consciousness into retention (the just-past echoing in the now), primal impression (the present moment), and protention (anticipation of what's coming). Contemplative practice reveals this structure experientially. Meditators report accessing the "specious present" at temporal scales normally below conscious threshold—the very interpenetration that constitutes durée.

**Microphenomenology**: Claire Petitmengin's microphenomenological interview techniques elicit fine-grained descriptions of brief moments of experience. The findings consistently reveal micro-dynamics invisible to casual introspection: subtle rises and falls, shifts between focal and peripheral awareness, the "grain" of temporal flow. These are not theoretical constructs but phenomenal data—evidence that durée is not merely a philosophical concept but a describable structure of experience.

**Cessation and the absence of duration**: Perhaps most striking, advanced meditators can voluntarily enter *nirodha samapatti*—cessation of perception and feeling. In this state, subjective time stops entirely. When meditators emerge, they report that no time seemed to pass—not shortened time, but the complete absence of temporal experience. This provides a kind of negative evidence for durée: when durée stops, there is no experience at all. Duration is not a feature of experience but its fundamental medium.

These findings strengthen Bergson's case. Durée is not a metaphysical hypothesis but a phenomenal structure that trained observers can access and describe. The "missing link" in consciousness theories—their failure to explain experienced duration—may persist because theorists ignore the systematic first-person research that contemplative traditions have developed over millennia.

## Embodied Duration

Recent research connects time experience to bodily rhythms. The insula processes interoceptive signals—heartbeat, breathing, gut feelings. These rhythms create a kind of internal clock, grounding temporal experience in bodily life. Duration may be essentially embodied.

This has implications for [AI consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/). If time experience requires embodiment—if durée is not abstract but lived through a body—then disembodied AI systems may be categorically incapable of temporal experience. It's not that they process time incorrectly but that they don't live time at all. Processing timestamps is not experiencing duration.

Bergson anticipated this in his emphasis on *élan vital*—the vital impulse that drives evolutionary creativity. Duration for Bergson is not a property of abstract mind but of living, evolving organisms. The interpenetration of past and present that constitutes durée requires the kind of organic memory that embeds history in bodily structure. A living body carries its past in its tissues; a computer carries data in storage.

## Durée and Quantum Collapse

A speculative but intriguing connection: Bergson's qualitative multiplicity resembles quantum superposition. Before measurement, a quantum system exists in superposition—not a definite state but all possible states interpenetrating. Upon measurement, this multiplicity collapses to a single outcome.

Duration as Bergson describes it is similarly a multiplicity that doesn't reduce to definite, separable states. The whole past is present, the future already anticipated, in an interpenetrating whole. Perhaps the "collapse" that creates each present moment is analogous to quantum collapse—or perhaps identical with it.

The [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) connection deepens this speculation. If consciousness participates in quantum collapse (as the site's framework proposes), and if collapse introduces the arrow of time, then durée may be phenomenologically apprehending what physics mathematically describes. What Bergson called the irreversibility of lived time—the way you cannot un-hear a melody—may reflect the deeper irreversibility of collapse itself. Each conscious moment doesn't just happen *in* time; it helps constitute time's direction by selecting among quantum possibilities.

Time-symmetric interpretations offer an even more striking parallel. In frameworks like the Two-State Vector Formalism, collapse isn't located at a moment but is the satisfaction of constraints across time—past and future boundary conditions aligning. This resonates with Bergson's description of durée as interpenetrating past, present, and future. If consciousness's selection operates atemporally (determining which "transactions" complete rather than pushing events at instants), then the flowing character of durée may be the phenomenal expression of this atemporal selection viewed from within the temporal structure it creates.

This connects to the site's [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet. If durée is the lived reality of quantum possibility, then consciousness experiencing time might be consciousness selecting among superposed states. The creative novelty Bergson attributes to duration could be the phenomenal character of quantum collapse as experienced from within. Where physics sees measurement outcomes, consciousness experiences the flowing present.

The speculation remains unproven. But it suggests that the "mystery" of time experience and the "mystery" of quantum measurement might be related—perhaps even the same mystery from different perspectives. Durée would name what collapse *feels like* from the inside.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Bergson's durée aligns with multiple site tenets:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: Duration as Bergson describes it is irreducible to physical description. Spatializing time transforms it into something else. The qualitative character of experienced duration—the way it feels to live through time rather than merely exist at successive instants—is precisely what physical descriptions cannot capture.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Durée is creative, bringing genuine novelty. Free acts emerge from the whole self acting in time. This creative causation is what Bergson means by freedom—and it's what the site means by consciousness influencing physical outcomes.

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)**: Duration is lived by a continuous self persisting through time. In many-worlds, there's no such self—just branching copies. Bergson's interpenetrating duration presupposes the kind of temporal identity that many-worlds dissolves.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occam)**: Spatialized time seems simpler—measurable, quantifiable, amenable to equation. But this simplicity is achieved by ignoring qualitative duration. The apparently simpler picture misses the phenomenon entirely. Bergson's framework is more complex but captures what scientific time systematically excludes.

## Further Reading

- [consciousness-and-creativity](/concepts/consciousness-and-creativity/) — How duration's creative novelty relates to the generation-selection model
- [neurophenomenology](/concepts/neurophenomenology/) — Contemplative science and access to temporal microstructure
- [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) — How quantum collapse may constitute time's arrow
- [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/) — The specious present and neuroscience of time
- [free-will](/topics/free-will/) — How temporal structure relates to agency
- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The explanatory gap that durée parallels
- [ai-consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/) — Why disembodied systems may lack temporal experience
- [consciousness-time-perception-2026-01-14](/research/consciousness-time-perception-2026-01-14/) — Research notes on this topic

## References

- Bergson, H. (1889/2001). *Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness*. Dover. (Original: *Essai sur les données immédiates de la conscience*)
- Bergson, H. (1896/1988). *Matter and Memory*. Zone Books.
- Bergson, H. (1907/1998). *Creative Evolution*. Dover.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Henri Bergson. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/bergson/
- Kent, L. & Wittmann, M. (2021). Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness. *Neuroscience of Consciousness*, 2021(2), niab011.
- Craig, A.D. (2009). How do you feel—now? The anterior insula and human awareness. *Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, 10(1), 59-70.
- James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Henry Holt.
