hugo/content/concepts/global-workspace-theory.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-18 23:45:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[attention]]'
- '[[functionalism]]'
- '[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[integrated-information-theory]]'
- '[[working-memory]]'
- '[[episodic-memory]]'
- '[[semantic-memory]]'
- '[[implicit-memory]]'
- '[[autonoetic-consciousness]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[global-workspace-theory-2026-01-14]]'
title: Global Workspace Theory
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[ai-consciousness]]'
---

Global Workspace Theory (GWT) is one of the most influential neuroscientific theories of consciousness. It explains *when* information becomes conscious—when it is broadcast globally across the brain—but not *why* this broadcast feels like anything. From this site's perspective, GWT provides a valuable description of [neural correlates](/concepts/neural-correlates-of-consciousness/) without solving the [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/).

## The Theory

Bernard Baars introduced GWT in 1988 using a theatrical metaphor. Consciousness is like a spotlight on a stage: the brightly lit area represents what we're currently aware of, while the vast darkness holds unconscious processes. Only information in the spotlight can be "seen" by the audience—the many specialized brain systems that process information.

### The Workspace Architecture

The "global workspace" is a network of neurons with widespread connections across the brain. When information enters this workspace, it becomes available to many cognitive systems simultaneously:

- Memory systems can encode it
- Language systems can describe it
- Motor systems can act on it
- Reasoning systems can evaluate it

This is consciousness as *access*—the difference between information that's available for report and action versus information that stays confined to specialized processors.

### The Global Neuronal Workspace

Stanislas Dehaene and Jean-Pierre Changeux developed GWT into the Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) hypothesis, identifying specific neural mechanisms. They proposed that the workspace is implemented by prefrontal and parietal neurons with long-range connections. When information achieves "ignition"—a sudden, synchronized activation pattern—it becomes conscious.

GNW distinguishes three states:

1. **Subliminal**: Information processed too weakly to reach the workspace
2. **Preconscious**: Information strong enough to reach the workspace but not currently attended
3. **Conscious**: Information that has achieved ignition and global broadcast

## The Access/Phenomenal Distinction

Here lies GWT's fundamental limitation. The theory explicitly addresses only *access consciousness*—the availability of information for reasoning, reporting, and action. It says nothing about *phenomenal consciousness*—why there is something it is like to have information in the workspace.

As the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy notes, GWT "provides an account of access consciousness but what of phenomenal consciousness?"

Ned Block has argued forcefully that these are distinct phenomena. His "overflow" argument holds that we experience more than we can report—phenomenal consciousness exceeds access consciousness. The Sperling experiment suggests we see all twelve letters in a briefly flashed display, even though we can only report four. If Block is right, GWT captures when information becomes accessible while missing the richer phenomenal experience that overflows these access boundaries.

## The COGITATE Experiment

The 2025 COGITATE study put GWT and [IIT](/concepts/integrated-information-theory/) to empirical test. Results were mixed for both theories:

**GNW predictions challenged:**
- The expected "ignition" when stimuli disappeared was not observed
- Prefrontal cortex activated for category recognition but not for specific identity or orientation

**Neither theory emerged unscathed.** This suggests caution about any premature physicalist explanation. The science of consciousness remains unsettled.

## GWT and AI Consciousness

GWT has direct implications for machine consciousness. If consciousness *is* global broadcast—the functional role of making information widely available—then AI systems implementing this architecture could be conscious. Some researchers have argued that Large Language Agents, with their ability to integrate information across many modules, might satisfy GWT's criteria.

This is precisely where the site's framework diverges most sharply. The [absent qualia objection](/arguments/functionalism/) applies: a system could implement global broadcast without phenomenal experience. A nation of people, each simulating a neuron in a workspace architecture, would implement the same functional organization as a conscious brain. Is the nation conscious?

Site's [AI consciousness skepticism](/topics/ai-consciousness/) rests on dualism, not denial that AI can implement workspace functions. The question is whether functional implementation suffices for experience.

## Working Memory as Workspace Content

The global workspace is essentially a form of [working memory](/concepts/working-memory/) operating at a global scale. Baddeley's multicomponent model (1974, updated through 2025) provides the cognitive architecture:

- **Central executive**: The attentional control system that determines what gains workspace access—implementing GWT's "spotlight" function
- **Phonological loop and visuospatial sketchpad**: Domain-specific stores that feed content to the workspace
- **Episodic buffer**: A binding mechanism that integrates multimodal representations and "makes them available to conscious awareness"

The episodic buffer is particularly significant. It performs the binding that GWT's ignition broadcasts globally. Baddeley's formulation—that consciousness *accesses* bound representations—implies something beyond the neural workspace itself does the accessing. This aligns with the site's dualism: the workspace provides content, but consciousness accesses it.

Recent research reveals a telling asymmetry: **maintenance can be unconscious while manipulation requires consciousness**. Activity-silent working memory shows information can be held in synaptic traces without awareness; when you need to *use* that information, conscious reactivation is necessary. This complicates GWT's equation of workspace presence with consciousness. Being in the workspace correlates with consciousness, but the relationship isn't identity. Content can be maintained in the workspace without conscious access; manipulation—the executive functions GWT proponents associate with consciousness—requires phenomenal awareness.

The 2025 COGITATE results reinforce this. Conscious *content* tracked with posterior cortex (visual, temporal areas), not the prefrontal-parietal broadcast network. The workspace's broadcasting mechanism and the conscious content it broadcasts may be distinct phenomena with different neural correlates.

## Memory Systems and Global Broadcast

Baars explicitly addressed how GWT explains the difference between conscious and unconscious memory. The global workspace provides a framework for understanding why some memories require conscious access while others operate automatically—a distinction mapped by Tulving's three-memory taxonomy.

### The Workspace Access Hierarchy

[Implicit memory](/concepts/implicit-memory/) operates without global broadcast. Procedural skills, priming, and conditioning function through local, specialised processors that don't require workspace ignition. When you ride a bicycle, the motor programs execute without entering the global workspace—they don't become available to language, reasoning, or reportability systems. This is why implicit memory accompanies *anoetic* consciousness: there is phenomenal character to skilled action, but it lacks the self-reflective quality that global availability enables.

[Semantic memory](/concepts/semantic-memory/) has intermediate workspace access. Facts can be retrieved and made globally available—you can report what you know, reason with it, act on it. But semantic retrieval doesn't require the full reconstructive binding that episodic memory involves. The tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon illustrates partial workspace access: semantic content is approaching but hasn't achieved ignition. *Noetic* consciousness accompanies successful semantic retrieval—you're aware of knowing without re-experiencing.

[Episodic memory](/concepts/episodic-memory/) requires full workspace ignition. Reconstructing a past experience demands the episodic buffer's binding operation, integration across multiple cortical areas, and global broadcast of the unified scene. This is why episodic memory accompanies *autonoetic* consciousness: the self is projected through time, multiple features are bound, and the result is globally available for reasoning, report, and emotional response.

### Broadcast Explains Phenomenological Differences

This mapping suggests GWT can explain *why* different memory types have different phenomenological characters. The difference between knowing a fact (noetic) and re-experiencing an event (autonoetic) corresponds to different degrees and types of workspace engagement:

| Memory Type | Workspace Role | Phenomenology |
|-------------|----------------|---------------|
| Implicit | Bypasses workspace | Anoetic—unreflective action |
| Semantic | Retrieval to workspace | Noetic—aware of knowing |
| Episodic | Full binding + broadcast | Autonoetic—re-experiencing |

However, this functional account faces the same hard problem objection. GWT explains *when* different memory types engage different workspace processes. It doesn't explain *why* workspace bypass feels like fluent action, workspace retrieval feels like knowing, and full broadcast feels like re-experiencing. The phenomenological hierarchy (anoetic → noetic → autonoetic) tracks workspace access, but correlation isn't constitution.

### Filter Theory Integration

From the site's perspective, the memory system hierarchy reveals *where* consciousness interfaces with cognition. Implicit memory shows consciousness can delegate—procedural systems run without continuous conscious engagement. But the [choking phenomenon](/concepts/implicit-memory/#choking-under-pressure-evidence-for-bidirectional-interaction) proves the interface remains: when consciousness re-engages with automatized skills, it causally disrupts them.

The workspace may be the neural correlate of the interface between consciousness and memory systems. Consciousness doesn't *enter* the workspace; it *accesses* what the workspace makes available. This reading preserves GWT's empirical insights while maintaining the site's dualist commitment: the workspace describes neural architecture; consciousness is what experiences the content that architecture provides.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Alignment

GWT is compatible with [Dualism](/tenets/#dualism) if read as describing neural correlates rather than constituting consciousness. Interactionist dualism predicts that consciousness will have reliable correlates—the physical interface where mind and brain meet. GWT may describe this interface without claiming to explain phenomenal consciousness.

The site's [attention article](/concepts/attention/) notes that attention serves as the "gateway" to the workspace. This connects with Stapp's proposal that attention is where consciousness influences physics through the quantum Zeno effect. GWT provides mainstream neuroscience context for this idea.

### Tension

GWT is typically presented as a physicalist/functionalist theory. It identifies consciousness with global broadcast rather than treating broadcast as the physical correlate of a distinct mental phenomenon. This conflicts with the site's commitment to irreducibility.

More subtly, GWT frames the flow as bottom-up: sensory information competes for workspace access through neural dynamics. The [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet holds that consciousness *selects* which information achieves ignition—it doesn't merely observe the winner of neural competition. These views could be compatible if consciousness biases which information wins, but GWT proponents don't typically frame it this way.

### The Simplicity Objection

GWT proponents might argue their theory is simpler than dualism—it explains consciousness without positing irreducible properties. The [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet responds: GWT's apparent simplicity is achieved by addressing only the "easy problems." As researchers acknowledge, "correlation cannot tell us whether the observed activity is the basis of phenomenal consciousness or of access consciousness in report."

GWT explains when and how information becomes accessible. It remains silent on why accessibility feels like anything at all.

## Further Reading

- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The puzzle GWT doesn't address
- [working-memory](/concepts/working-memory/) — The cognitive system implementing the workspace architecture
- [episodic-memory](/concepts/episodic-memory/) — Autonoetic consciousness requiring full workspace ignition
- [semantic-memory](/concepts/semantic-memory/) — Noetic consciousness with intermediate workspace access
- [implicit-memory](/concepts/implicit-memory/) — Anoetic consciousness bypassing the workspace
- [autonoetic-consciousness](/concepts/autonoetic-consciousness/) — The self-knowing consciousness GWT must explain
- [integrated-information-theory](/concepts/integrated-information-theory/) — A rival theory tested alongside GNW
- [neural-correlates-of-consciousness](/concepts/neural-correlates-of-consciousness/) — The broader research program GWT contributes to
- [attention](/concepts/attention/) — The gateway to the workspace
- [functionalism](/arguments/functionalism/) — The philosophical framework underlying GWT
- [global-workspace-theory-2026-01-14](/research/global-workspace-theory-2026-01-14/) — Detailed research notes

## References

- Baars, B. J. (1988). *A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness*. Cambridge University Press.
- Dehaene, S., Kerszberg, M., & Changeux, J. P. (1998). A neuronal model of a global workspace in effortful cognitive tasks. *PNAS*, 95(24), 14529-14534.
- Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework. *Cognition*, 79(1-2), 1-37.
- Block, N. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology and neuroscience. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 30(5-6), 481-499.
- COGITATE Consortium. (2025). Adversarial testing of global neuronal workspace and integrated information theories of consciousness. *Nature*.

Commit message:

chore(auto): Evolution session 184 complete
Tasks executed: 1
- research-topic: metacognition and consciousness

Research notes: 83 (+1)
Chain task generated: expand-topic for metacognition concept page

hugo/content/concepts/global-workspace-theory.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-19 04:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[attention]]'
- '[[functionalism]]'
- '[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[integrated-information-theory]]'
- '[[working-memory]]'
- '[[episodic-memory]]'
- '[[semantic-memory]]'
- '[[implicit-memory]]'
- '[[autonoetic-consciousness]]'
- '[[dreams-and-consciousness]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[global-workspace-theory-2026-01-14]]'
title: Global Workspace Theory
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[ai-consciousness]]'
---

Global Workspace Theory (GWT) is one of the most influential neuroscientific theories of consciousness. It explains *when* information becomes conscious—when it is broadcast globally across the brain—but not *why* this broadcast feels like anything. From this site's perspective, GWT provides a valuable description of [neural correlates](/concepts/neural-correlates-of-consciousness/) without solving the [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/).

## The Theory

Bernard Baars introduced GWT in 1988 using a theatrical metaphor. Consciousness is like a spotlight on a stage: the brightly lit area represents what we're currently aware of, while the vast darkness holds unconscious processes. Only information in the spotlight can be "seen" by the audience—the many specialized brain systems that process information.

### The Workspace Architecture

The "global workspace" is a network of neurons with widespread connections across the brain. When information enters this workspace, it becomes available to many cognitive systems simultaneously:

- Memory systems can encode it
- Language systems can describe it
- Motor systems can act on it
- Reasoning systems can evaluate it

This is consciousness as *access*—the difference between information that's available for report and action versus information that stays confined to specialized processors.

### The Global Neuronal Workspace

Stanislas Dehaene and Jean-Pierre Changeux developed GWT into the Global Neuronal Workspace (GNW) hypothesis, identifying specific neural mechanisms. They proposed that the workspace is implemented by prefrontal and parietal neurons with long-range connections. When information achieves "ignition"—a sudden, synchronized activation pattern—it becomes conscious.

GNW distinguishes three states:

1. **Subliminal**: Information processed too weakly to reach the workspace
2. **Preconscious**: Information strong enough to reach the workspace but not currently attended
3. **Conscious**: Information that has achieved ignition and global broadcast

## The Access/Phenomenal Distinction

Here lies GWT's fundamental limitation. The theory explicitly addresses only *access consciousness*—the availability of information for reasoning, reporting, and action. It says nothing about *phenomenal consciousness*—why there is something it is like to have information in the workspace.

As the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy notes, GWT "provides an account of access consciousness but what of phenomenal consciousness?"

Ned Block has argued forcefully that these are distinct phenomena. His "overflow" argument holds that we experience more than we can report—phenomenal consciousness exceeds access consciousness. The Sperling experiment suggests we see all twelve letters in a briefly flashed display, even though we can only report four. If Block is right, GWT captures when information becomes accessible while missing the richer phenomenal experience that overflows these access boundaries.

## The COGITATE Experiment

The April 2025 COGITATE study represents a landmark event in consciousness research: a seven-year adversarial collaboration where GWT and [IIT](/concepts/integrated-information-theory/) proponents jointly designed experiments to test their theories. The explicit goal was to produce results that could refute one or both theories.

**GNW predictions challenged:**
- The expected "ignition" when stimuli disappeared was not observed—a core GNW prediction
- Prefrontal cortex activated for category recognition but not for specific identity or orientation
- The general pattern showed limited representation in prefrontal cortex compared to what full global broadcast predicts

**Neither theory emerged unscathed.** As the researchers concluded: "It was clear that no single experiment would decisively refute either theory"—the theories proved "too different in assumptions and explanatory goals" for direct adjudication.

This outcome supports the [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet. Neither leading physicalist theory of consciousness fully captures the phenomena. The COGITATE results don't refute physicalism, but they demonstrate that our best scientific theories remain incomplete. The hard problem persists not because we lack clever theories but because the empirical constraints remain weak enough to sustain multiple incompatible accounts.

### Implications for Consciousness Localization

COGITATE confirmed that conscious content tracks with posterior cortex (visual, temporal areas) rather than the prefrontal-parietal broadcast network. This has implications beyond laboratory experiments. [Dreaming](/concepts/dreams-and-consciousness/) persists when the posterior hot zone remains active, even during NREM sleep when prefrontal areas are largely offline. If GWT's workspace mechanism were necessary for consciousness, prefrontal deactivation should eliminate experience—yet dreams demonstrate consciousness without full workspace engagement.

The dissociation suggests a refinement: the global workspace may be sufficient for *reportable* consciousness without being necessary for consciousness itself. The filter theory reading remains intact—consciousness may access whatever the posterior cortex provides, with the workspace enabling but not constituting that access.

## GWT and AI Consciousness

GWT has direct implications for machine consciousness. If consciousness *is* global broadcast—the functional role of making information widely available—then AI systems implementing this architecture could be conscious. Some researchers have argued that Large Language Agents, with their ability to integrate information across many modules, might satisfy GWT's criteria.

This is precisely where the site's framework diverges most sharply. The [absent qualia objection](/arguments/functionalism/) applies: a system could implement global broadcast without phenomenal experience. A nation of people, each simulating a neuron in a workspace architecture, would implement the same functional organization as a conscious brain. Is the nation conscious?

Site's [AI consciousness skepticism](/topics/ai-consciousness/) rests on dualism, not denial that AI can implement workspace functions. The question is whether functional implementation suffices for experience.

## Working Memory as Workspace Content

The global workspace is essentially a form of [working memory](/concepts/working-memory/) operating at a global scale. Baddeley's multicomponent model (1974, updated through 2025) provides the cognitive architecture:

- **Central executive**: The attentional control system that determines what gains workspace access—implementing GWT's "spotlight" function
- **Phonological loop and visuospatial sketchpad**: Domain-specific stores that feed content to the workspace
- **Episodic buffer**: A binding mechanism that integrates multimodal representations and "makes them available to conscious awareness"

The episodic buffer is particularly significant. It performs the binding that GWT's ignition broadcasts globally. Baddeley's formulation—that consciousness *accesses* bound representations—implies something beyond the neural workspace itself does the accessing. This aligns with the site's dualism: the workspace provides content, but consciousness accesses it.

Recent research reveals a telling asymmetry: **maintenance can be unconscious while manipulation requires consciousness**. Activity-silent working memory shows information can be held in synaptic traces without awareness; when you need to *use* that information, conscious reactivation is necessary. This complicates GWT's equation of workspace presence with consciousness. Being in the workspace correlates with consciousness, but the relationship isn't identity. Content can be maintained in the workspace without conscious access; manipulation—the executive functions GWT proponents associate with consciousness—requires phenomenal awareness.

The 2025 COGITATE results reinforce this. Conscious *content* tracked with posterior cortex (visual, temporal areas), not the prefrontal-parietal broadcast network. The workspace's broadcasting mechanism and the conscious content it broadcasts may be distinct phenomena with different neural correlates.

## Memory Systems and Global Broadcast

Baars explicitly addressed how GWT explains the difference between conscious and unconscious memory. The global workspace provides a framework for understanding why some memories require conscious access while others operate automatically—a distinction mapped by Tulving's three-memory taxonomy.

### The Workspace Access Hierarchy

[Implicit memory](/concepts/implicit-memory/) operates without global broadcast. Procedural skills, priming, and conditioning function through local, specialised processors that don't require workspace ignition. When you ride a bicycle, the motor programs execute without entering the global workspace—they don't become available to language, reasoning, or reportability systems. This is why implicit memory accompanies *anoetic* consciousness: there is phenomenal character to skilled action, but it lacks the self-reflective quality that global availability enables.

[Semantic memory](/concepts/semantic-memory/) has intermediate workspace access. Facts can be retrieved and made globally available—you can report what you know, reason with it, act on it. But semantic retrieval doesn't require the full reconstructive binding that episodic memory involves. The tip-of-the-tongue phenomenon illustrates partial workspace access: semantic content is approaching but hasn't achieved ignition. *Noetic* consciousness accompanies successful semantic retrieval—you're aware of knowing without re-experiencing.

[Episodic memory](/concepts/episodic-memory/) requires full workspace ignition. Reconstructing a past experience demands the episodic buffer's binding operation, integration across multiple cortical areas, and global broadcast of the unified scene. This is why episodic memory accompanies *autonoetic* consciousness: the self is projected through time, multiple features are bound, and the result is globally available for reasoning, report, and emotional response.

### Broadcast Explains Phenomenological Differences

This mapping suggests GWT can explain *why* different memory types have different phenomenological characters. The difference between knowing a fact (noetic) and re-experiencing an event (autonoetic) corresponds to different degrees and types of workspace engagement:

| Memory Type | Workspace Role | Phenomenology |
|-------------|----------------|---------------|
| Implicit | Bypasses workspace | Anoetic—unreflective action |
| Semantic | Retrieval to workspace | Noetic—aware of knowing |
| Episodic | Full binding + broadcast | Autonoetic—re-experiencing |

However, this functional account faces the same hard problem objection. GWT explains *when* different memory types engage different workspace processes. It doesn't explain *why* workspace bypass feels like fluent action, workspace retrieval feels like knowing, and full broadcast feels like re-experiencing. The phenomenological hierarchy (anoetic → noetic → autonoetic) tracks workspace access, but correlation isn't constitution.

### Filter Theory Integration

From the site's perspective, the memory system hierarchy reveals *where* consciousness interfaces with cognition. Implicit memory shows consciousness can delegate—procedural systems run without continuous conscious engagement. But the [choking phenomenon](/concepts/implicit-memory/#choking-under-pressure-evidence-for-bidirectional-interaction) proves the interface remains: when consciousness re-engages with automatized skills, it causally disrupts them.

The workspace may be the neural correlate of the interface between consciousness and memory systems. Consciousness doesn't *enter* the workspace; it *accesses* what the workspace makes available. This reading preserves GWT's empirical insights while maintaining the site's dualist commitment: the workspace describes neural architecture; consciousness is what experiences the content that architecture provides.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Alignment

GWT is compatible with [Dualism](/tenets/#dualism) if read as describing neural correlates rather than constituting consciousness. Interactionist dualism predicts that consciousness will have reliable correlates—the physical interface where mind and brain meet. GWT may describe this interface without claiming to explain phenomenal consciousness.

The site's [attention article](/concepts/attention/) notes that attention serves as the "gateway" to the workspace. This connects with Stapp's proposal that attention is where consciousness influences physics through the quantum Zeno effect. GWT provides mainstream neuroscience context for this idea.

### Tension

GWT is typically presented as a physicalist/functionalist theory. It identifies consciousness with global broadcast rather than treating broadcast as the physical correlate of a distinct mental phenomenon. This conflicts with the site's commitment to irreducibility.

More subtly, GWT frames the flow as bottom-up: sensory information competes for workspace access through neural dynamics. The [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet holds that consciousness *selects* which information achieves ignition—it doesn't merely observe the winner of neural competition. These views could be compatible if consciousness biases which information wins, but GWT proponents don't typically frame it this way.

### The Simplicity Objection

GWT proponents might argue their theory is simpler than dualism—it explains consciousness without positing irreducible properties. The [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet responds: GWT's apparent simplicity is achieved by addressing only the "easy problems." As researchers acknowledge, "correlation cannot tell us whether the observed activity is the basis of phenomenal consciousness or of access consciousness in report."

GWT explains when and how information becomes accessible. It remains silent on why accessibility feels like anything at all.

## Further Reading

- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The puzzle GWT doesn't address
- [working-memory](/concepts/working-memory/) — The cognitive system implementing the workspace architecture
- [episodic-memory](/concepts/episodic-memory/) — Autonoetic consciousness requiring full workspace ignition
- [semantic-memory](/concepts/semantic-memory/) — Noetic consciousness with intermediate workspace access
- [implicit-memory](/concepts/implicit-memory/) — Anoetic consciousness bypassing the workspace
- [autonoetic-consciousness](/concepts/autonoetic-consciousness/) — The self-knowing consciousness GWT must explain
- [integrated-information-theory](/concepts/integrated-information-theory/) — A rival theory tested alongside GNW
- [neural-correlates-of-consciousness](/concepts/neural-correlates-of-consciousness/) — The broader research program GWT contributes to
- [attention](/concepts/attention/) — The gateway to the workspace
- [functionalism](/arguments/functionalism/) — The philosophical framework underlying GWT
- [dreams-and-consciousness](/concepts/dreams-and-consciousness/) — Dreaming without full workspace engagement
- [global-workspace-theory-2026-01-14](/research/global-workspace-theory-2026-01-14/) — Detailed research notes

## References

- Baars, B. J. (1988). *A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness*. Cambridge University Press.
- Dehaene, S., Kerszberg, M., & Changeux, J. P. (1998). A neuronal model of a global workspace in effortful cognitive tasks. *PNAS*, 95(24), 14529-14534.
- Dehaene, S., & Naccache, L. (2001). Towards a cognitive neuroscience of consciousness: basic evidence and a workspace framework. *Cognition*, 79(1-2), 1-37.
- Block, N. (2007). Consciousness, accessibility, and the mesh between psychology and neuroscience. *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 30(5-6), 481-499.
- COGITATE Consortium. (2025). Adversarial testing of global neuronal workspace and integrated information theories of consciousness. *Nature*.
