hugo/content/concepts/neurophenomenology.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-15 20:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[phenomenology]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[duration]]'
- '[[mysterianism]]'
- '[[introspection]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[eastern-philosophy-consciousness]]'
- '[[neurophenomenology-meditation-studies-2026-01-14]]'
title: Neurophenomenology and Contemplative Science
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Neurophenomenology is the research program pioneered by Francisco Varela integrating first-person phenomenological reports with third-person neuroscience. Its central hypothesis: neither perspective alone suffices for consciousness science. Contemplative traditions—particularly Buddhist meditation—provide systematic methods for refining first-person observation, revealing consciousness structures invisible to ordinary introspection.

This matters for the question of whether consciousness reduces to physical processes. If advanced meditators can access phenomenal states with no third-person equivalent, and if trained introspection reveals experiential complexity that neuroscience cannot predict or explain, then materialism faces a fundamental limitation. The data itself requires methods physics cannot supply.

## Varela's Method

Francisco Varela (1946-2001) proposed neurophenomenology as "a methodological remedy for the hard problem." The core insight: the explanatory gap between physical processes and subjective experience cannot be closed from the third-person side alone. Understanding consciousness requires integrating first-person data obtained through rigorous phenomenological training.

The method involves three elements:

1. **Phenomenological training**: Subjects learn to observe their own experience systematically—often through meditation or microphenomenological interview techniques
2. **Neural measurement**: Brain activity is recorded during specific experiential states
3. **Mutual constraint**: First-person reports and neural data inform each other; neither is reduced to the other

This is not correlation hunting. The goal is discovering lawful relationships between experiential categories (identified phenomenologically) and neural dynamics—relationships invisible without both perspectives.

Varela explicitly rejected the idea that first-person data could be eliminated. There is no "theoretical fix" that makes phenomenology unnecessary. The subjective dimension of consciousness is an irreducible field of phenomena requiring its own methods of investigation.

## Contemplative Science

Contemplative traditions have systematically investigated consciousness for millennia. Buddhist meditation in particular offers protocols for observing mental processes with precision unavailable to untrained introspection. Contemporary contemplative neuroscience applies these methods scientifically.

What meditation reveals about consciousness:

**Temporal microstructure**: Long-term meditators report access to the "specious present"—Husserl's retention-primal impression-protention structure—at fine temporal scales. Buddhist traditions describe *khanika* (momentariness): experience arising and passing in rapid succession. Ordinary awareness blurs these transitions; contemplative training discloses them.

**The constructed self**: Advanced meditation reveals the self as dynamic process rather than fixed entity. Moments of "selfless" awareness occur where the usual subject-object structure dissolves. This is phenomenological data about personal identity's construction, invisible to third-person methods.

**Phenomenal complexity**: Eight progressively refined jhana states, each with distinct phenomenology, demonstrate consciousness's vast experiential range:
- First jhana: directed attention, sustained attention, joy, ease
- Second jhana: internal confidence, joy, ease
- Third jhana: equanimity, ease
- Fourth jhana: pure equanimity
- Fifth through eighth: formless states (infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, neither-perception-nor-non-perception)

These states exist. Long-term meditators enter them reliably. Neuroscience can measure correlates. But the phenomenology—what these states are like from within—exceeds what any brain scan reveals.

## Jhana Neuroscience

Recent research (2024-2025) using 7-Tesla fMRI has studied meditators with 23,000+ hours of practice entering jhana states. Key findings:

- Disrupted hierarchical brain organization
- Decreased within-network modularity alongside increased global functional connectivity
- Increased Lempel-Ziv complexity (brain entropy) during jhana
- Neural signatures distinct from ordinary waking, sleep, or other altered states

The phenomenology matters for interpreting these results. Jhana practitioners report stable, refined, "radically altered" awareness—not reduced consciousness but transformed consciousness. The neural changes accompany (correlate with) these phenomenal transformations but do not explain why these particular brain patterns produce these particular experiences rather than none at all.

## Cessation of Consciousness

Perhaps the most striking finding: advanced meditators can voluntarily "turn off" consciousness from within. *Nirodha samapatti*—the cessation of perception and feeling—is described across Buddhist traditions. Traditional reports describe cessation lasting hours or even days, though extended durations have not been scientifically verified.

What makes cessation significant:

- It occurs while the brain remains active (cessation is not brain death)
- Re-emergence is spontaneous—consciousness "restarts" without external intervention
- The experience (or non-experience) is distinct from dreamless sleep, anesthesia, or other unconscious states

If consciousness were identical to neural activity, cessation should correspond to neural silence. It doesn't. Brain activity continues during cessation, just reorganized. This is compatible with the site's filter theory: perhaps cessation represents complete filtering (consciousness without phenomenal content) rather than consciousness's absence.

## Microphenomenology

Claire Petitmengin developed microphenomenology from Varela's neurophenomenology. The method uses specialized interview techniques to elicit fine-grained descriptions of brief moments of experience. The goal is triggering what Husserl called the phenomenological reduction—attending to experience itself rather than our theories about experience.

Key techniques distinguish microphenomenology from ordinary introspective report:

- **Present-tense indicators**: directing attention to current experience rather than memory
- **Non-leading questions**: avoiding suggestion about what subjects should find
- **Re-enactment**: having subjects relive experiences rather than abstract from them
- **Content over process**: asking "how did that unfold?" rather than "why did that happen?"

The interviewer guides subjects through a re-enactment of the experience, accessing details that ordinary recall misses. "Performative coherence" replaces correspondence as the validity criterion: does the description cohere with the actual texture of lived experience?

Applications include:

- Epilepsy anticipation (pre-seizure experiential signatures)
- Pain phenomenology
- Creative insight ("aha" moments)
- Mathematical discovery

The findings consistently show that "a large part of our experience remains usually unnoticed." Trained attention reveals micro-dynamics—subtle experiential structure—invisible to casual introspection. This supports the Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet: materialist "simplicity" may reflect failure to observe rather than absence of complexity.

## Default Mode Network Studies

The default mode network (DMN)—medial prefrontal and posterior cingulate cortices—activates during self-referential thought and deactivates during focused attention. Meditation studies consistently show:

- Reduced DMN activity across meditation types in experienced practitioners
- Stronger coupling between DMN nodes and attentional regions
- State-to-trait changes: structural reconfiguration with long-term practice

These correlates are consistent with multiple interpretations. The materialist reads them as "meditation changes the brain which changes experience." The filter theorist can read them differently: reduced DMN activity may represent reduced filtering—allowing consciousness to manifest differently—rather than "producing" altered states.

## The Reliability of Trained Introspection

Skeptics (notably Daniel Dennett and Eric Schwitzgebel) argue that [introspection](/concepts/introspection/) is fundamentally unreliable and cannot provide scientific data. The introspection debate, however, reveals a crucial distinction that neurophenomenology exploits: the difference between access to cognitive *processes* (how we decide things) and access to phenomenal *content* (what it is like to have experience). Nisbett and Wilson's famous critique concerned process access; contemplative science targets content access, which remains far more plausible.

Neurophenomenology responds to the skeptical challenge on multiple fronts:

1. **Training matters**: Fox and colleagues (2012) found that meditation experience predicts introspective accuracy following a logarithmic learning curve—the same pattern seen in other skill acquisition. Significantly, no novice meditators showed high introspective accuracy. Just as an untrained person cannot reliably identify bird species from song while an ornithologist can, introspection requires cultivated attention.

2. **Content, not process**: Contemplatives are not introspecting why they choose one option over another (where confabulation dominates). They are attending to the phenomenal character of experience itself—what it is like to be in jhana, how temporal flow presents itself, whether the sense of self is present or absent. This is the domain where even critics acknowledge some access.

3. **Convergent findings**: Microphenomenological interviews produce convergent results across subjects—fine-grained phenomenological categories that replicate.

4. **Predictive power**: First-person reports from trained observers predict neural signatures that untrained reports do not. The data have empirical consequences.

This does not make introspection infallible. But the claim that first-person data are inherently unscientific is too strong. Rigorous methods produce reliable results—and contemplative traditions have been refining those methods for millennia.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Neurophenomenology and contemplative science support the site's framework:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: These research programs provide systematic evidence that consciousness has irreducible first-person features. Jhana phenomenology and cessation experiences have no third-person equivalents. Even with sophisticated neuroimaging, researchers cannot predict or explain the specific qualitative character of meditative states from brain data alone. The explanatory gap is real—a structural feature, not a temporary limitation.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occam)**: Contemplative traditions have investigated consciousness for millennia. Dismissing this evidence as "merely subjective" isn't parsimony—it's methodological blindness. The apparent simplicity of materialist accounts is achieved by ignoring two thousand years of systematic first-person research. Meditation reveals phenomenal complexity invisible to third-person science: the "simpler" physicalist picture omits the most fundamental data.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Meditation demonstrates consciousness's active capacity. Through training, meditators transform their experience—accessing states, altering temporal perception, voluntarily entering cessation. This suggests consciousness is not merely a passive accompaniment to neural activity but an active participant shaping what neural patterns become actual. The meditator's intent produces neurophysiological changes.

**Connection to filter theory**: Contemplative findings are compatible with the filter interpretation. DMN reduction may represent altered filtering, not altered production. Jhana states may involve changing interface parameters. Cessation might be complete filtering—consciousness without phenomenal content passing through. The body-brain system shapes and constrains experience without necessarily generating it.

## Further Reading

- [introspection](/concepts/introspection/) — The reliability debate and process/content distinction
- [phenomenology](/concepts/phenomenology/) — The philosophical tradition grounding neurophenomenology
- [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/) — How contemplative observation reveals time's structure
- [duration](/concepts/duration/) — Bergson's analysis of lived time, convergent with contemplative reports
- [qualia](/concepts/qualia/) — The qualitative features that contemplative training discloses
- [eastern-philosophy-consciousness](/topics/eastern-philosophy-consciousness/) — The contemplative traditions informing this research
- [mysterianism](/concepts/mysterianism/) — Cognitive limits that neurophenomenology respects
- [neurophenomenology-meditation-studies-2026-01-14](/research/neurophenomenology-meditation-studies-2026-01-14/) — Research notes on this topic

## References

- Varela, F. (1996). Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the hard problem. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 3(4), 330-349.
- Thompson, E. (2007). *Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind*. Harvard University Press.
- Petitmengin, C. (2006). Describing one's subjective experience in the second person. *Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences*, 5(3), 229-269.
- Fox, K.C.R., et al. (2012). Meditation experience predicts introspective accuracy. *PLOS One*, 7(9), e45370.
- Nisbett, R.E., & Wilson, T.D. (1977). Telling more than we can know. *Psychological Review*, 84(3), 231-259.
- Brewer, J.A. et al. (2011). Meditation experience is associated with differences in default mode network activity and connectivity. *PNAS*, 108(50), 20254-20259.
- Laukkonen, R.E. et al. (2023). Cessations of consciousness in meditation: Advancing a scientific understanding. *Progress in Brain Research*, 280, 61-87.
- Neuroscience of Consciousness (2025). Deep computational neurophenomenology. *Oxford Academic*.

Commit message:

chore(auto): Evolution session 130 complete
Tasks executed: 3
- Cross-review neurophenomenology.md with specious-present insights
- Cross-review time-collapse-and-agency.md with specious-present insights
- Research consciousness and episodic memory

Convergence: 95%+ (stable)
All links OK

hugo/content/concepts/neurophenomenology.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-16 12:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[phenomenology]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[duration]]'
- '[[specious-present]]'
- '[[mysterianism]]'
- '[[introspection]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-14
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[eastern-philosophy-consciousness]]'
- '[[neurophenomenology-meditation-studies-2026-01-14]]'
title: Neurophenomenology and Contemplative Science
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Neurophenomenology is the research program pioneered by Francisco Varela integrating first-person phenomenological reports with third-person neuroscience. Its central hypothesis: neither perspective alone suffices for consciousness science. Contemplative traditions—particularly Buddhist meditation—provide systematic methods for refining first-person observation, revealing consciousness structures invisible to ordinary introspection.

This matters for the question of whether consciousness reduces to physical processes. If advanced meditators can access phenomenal states with no third-person equivalent, and if trained introspection reveals experiential complexity that neuroscience cannot predict or explain, then materialism faces a fundamental limitation. The data itself requires methods physics cannot supply.

## Varela's Method

Francisco Varela (1946-2001) proposed neurophenomenology as "a methodological remedy for the hard problem." The core insight: the explanatory gap between physical processes and subjective experience cannot be closed from the third-person side alone. Understanding consciousness requires integrating first-person data obtained through rigorous phenomenological training.

The method involves three elements:

1. **Phenomenological training**: Subjects learn to observe their own experience systematically—often through meditation or microphenomenological interview techniques
2. **Neural measurement**: Brain activity is recorded during specific experiential states
3. **Mutual constraint**: First-person reports and neural data inform each other; neither is reduced to the other

This is not correlation hunting. The goal is discovering lawful relationships between experiential categories (identified phenomenologically) and neural dynamics—relationships invisible without both perspectives.

Varela explicitly rejected the idea that first-person data could be eliminated. There is no "theoretical fix" that makes phenomenology unnecessary. The subjective dimension of consciousness is an irreducible field of phenomena requiring its own methods of investigation.

## Contemplative Science

Contemplative traditions have systematically investigated consciousness for millennia. Buddhist meditation in particular offers protocols for observing mental processes with precision unavailable to untrained introspection. Contemporary contemplative neuroscience applies these methods scientifically.

What meditation reveals about consciousness:

**Temporal microstructure**: Long-term meditators report access to the [specious present](/concepts/specious-present/)—the experienced duration of "now" ranging from roughly 100 milliseconds to 3 seconds. Husserl's retention-primal impression-protention structure provides the phenomenological framework; Buddhist traditions describe *khanika* (momentariness): experience arising and passing in rapid succession. Ordinary awareness blurs these transitions; contemplative training discloses them.

The specious present debate between extensionalists (Dainton, Foster) and retentionalists (Husserl, Broad) concerns whether experience is genuinely temporally extended or consists of instantaneous moments with past-directed intentional content. The site adopts a modified extensionalism: experience is genuinely extended, with the extension constituted through quantum collapse. This explains both the extended phenomenology and the retention-like structure—the echoing of the past in the present may reflect retrocausal boundary conditions in the collapse process. Contemplative access to *khanika* may be access to collapse-constituted duration-blocks at fine temporal resolution.

Neural correlates support the phenomenological findings: gamma-range synchronies (30-70 Hz) during perceptual tasks may implement temporal binding, with the ~25-35ms gamma cycle corresponding roughly to the lower bound of perceptual simultaneity. The correspondence between phenomenologically disclosed temporal structure and these neural dynamics exemplifies exactly the mutual constraint Varela envisioned.

**The constructed self**: Advanced meditation reveals the self as dynamic process rather than fixed entity. Moments of "selfless" awareness occur where the usual subject-object structure dissolves. This is phenomenological data about personal identity's construction, invisible to third-person methods.

**Phenomenal complexity**: Eight progressively refined jhana states, each with distinct phenomenology, demonstrate consciousness's vast experiential range:
- First jhana: directed attention, sustained attention, joy, ease
- Second jhana: internal confidence, joy, ease
- Third jhana: equanimity, ease
- Fourth jhana: pure equanimity
- Fifth through eighth: formless states (infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, neither-perception-nor-non-perception)

These states exist. Long-term meditators enter them reliably. Neuroscience can measure correlates. But the phenomenology—what these states are like from within—exceeds what any brain scan reveals.

## Jhana Neuroscience

Recent research (2024-2025) using 7-Tesla fMRI has studied meditators with 23,000+ hours of practice entering jhana states. Key findings:

- Disrupted hierarchical brain organization
- Decreased within-network modularity alongside increased global functional connectivity
- Increased Lempel-Ziv complexity (brain entropy) during jhana
- Neural signatures distinct from ordinary waking, sleep, or other altered states

The phenomenology matters for interpreting these results. Jhana practitioners report stable, refined, "radically altered" awareness—not reduced consciousness but transformed consciousness. The neural changes accompany (correlate with) these phenomenal transformations but do not explain why these particular brain patterns produce these particular experiences rather than none at all.

## Cessation of Consciousness

Perhaps the most striking finding: advanced meditators can voluntarily "turn off" consciousness from within. *Nirodha samapatti*—the cessation of perception and feeling—is described across Buddhist traditions. Traditional reports describe cessation lasting hours or even days, though extended durations have not been scientifically verified.

What makes cessation significant:

- It occurs while the brain remains active (cessation is not brain death)
- Re-emergence is spontaneous—consciousness "restarts" without external intervention
- The experience (or non-experience) is distinct from dreamless sleep, anesthesia, or other unconscious states

If consciousness were identical to neural activity, cessation should correspond to neural silence. It doesn't. Brain activity continues during cessation, just reorganized. This is compatible with the site's filter theory: perhaps cessation represents complete filtering (consciousness without phenomenal content) rather than consciousness's absence.

## Microphenomenology

Claire Petitmengin developed microphenomenology from Varela's neurophenomenology. The method uses specialized interview techniques to elicit fine-grained descriptions of brief moments of experience. The goal is triggering what Husserl called the phenomenological reduction—attending to experience itself rather than our theories about experience.

Key techniques distinguish microphenomenology from ordinary introspective report:

- **Present-tense indicators**: directing attention to current experience rather than memory
- **Non-leading questions**: avoiding suggestion about what subjects should find
- **Re-enactment**: having subjects relive experiences rather than abstract from them
- **Content over process**: asking "how did that unfold?" rather than "why did that happen?"

The interviewer guides subjects through a re-enactment of the experience, accessing details that ordinary recall misses. "Performative coherence" replaces correspondence as the validity criterion: does the description cohere with the actual texture of lived experience?

Applications include:

- Epilepsy anticipation (pre-seizure experiential signatures)
- Pain phenomenology
- Creative insight ("aha" moments)
- Mathematical discovery

The findings consistently show that "a large part of our experience remains usually unnoticed." Trained attention reveals micro-dynamics—subtle experiential structure—invisible to casual introspection. This supports the Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet: materialist "simplicity" may reflect failure to observe rather than absence of complexity.

## Default Mode Network Studies

The default mode network (DMN)—medial prefrontal and posterior cingulate cortices—activates during self-referential thought and deactivates during focused attention. Meditation studies consistently show:

- Reduced DMN activity across meditation types in experienced practitioners
- Stronger coupling between DMN nodes and attentional regions
- State-to-trait changes: structural reconfiguration with long-term practice

These correlates are consistent with multiple interpretations. The materialist reads them as "meditation changes the brain which changes experience." The filter theorist can read them differently: reduced DMN activity may represent reduced filtering—allowing consciousness to manifest differently—rather than "producing" altered states.

## The Reliability of Trained Introspection

Skeptics (notably Daniel Dennett and Eric Schwitzgebel) argue that [introspection](/concepts/introspection/) is fundamentally unreliable and cannot provide scientific data. The introspection debate, however, reveals a crucial distinction that neurophenomenology exploits: the difference between access to cognitive *processes* (how we decide things) and access to phenomenal *content* (what it is like to have experience). Nisbett and Wilson's famous critique concerned process access; contemplative science targets content access, which remains far more plausible.

Neurophenomenology responds to the skeptical challenge on multiple fronts:

1. **Training matters**: Fox and colleagues (2012) found that meditation experience predicts introspective accuracy following a logarithmic learning curve—the same pattern seen in other skill acquisition. Significantly, no novice meditators showed high introspective accuracy. Just as an untrained person cannot reliably identify bird species from song while an ornithologist can, introspection requires cultivated attention.

2. **Content, not process**: Contemplatives are not introspecting why they choose one option over another (where confabulation dominates). They are attending to the phenomenal character of experience itself—what it is like to be in jhana, how temporal flow presents itself, whether the sense of self is present or absent. This is the domain where even critics acknowledge some access.

3. **Convergent findings**: Microphenomenological interviews produce convergent results across subjects—fine-grained phenomenological categories that replicate.

4. **Predictive power**: First-person reports from trained observers predict neural signatures that untrained reports do not. The data have empirical consequences.

This does not make introspection infallible. But the claim that first-person data are inherently unscientific is too strong. Rigorous methods produce reliable results—and contemplative traditions have been refining those methods for millennia.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

Neurophenomenology and contemplative science support the site's framework:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: These research programs provide systematic evidence that consciousness has irreducible first-person features. Jhana phenomenology and cessation experiences have no third-person equivalents. Even with sophisticated neuroimaging, researchers cannot predict or explain the specific qualitative character of meditative states from brain data alone. The explanatory gap is real—a structural feature, not a temporary limitation.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occam)**: Contemplative traditions have investigated consciousness for millennia. Dismissing this evidence as "merely subjective" isn't parsimony—it's methodological blindness. The apparent simplicity of materialist accounts is achieved by ignoring two thousand years of systematic first-person research. Meditation reveals phenomenal complexity invisible to third-person science: the "simpler" physicalist picture omits the most fundamental data.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Meditation demonstrates consciousness's active capacity. Through training, meditators transform their experience—accessing states, altering temporal perception, voluntarily entering cessation. This suggests consciousness is not merely a passive accompaniment to neural activity but an active participant shaping what neural patterns become actual. The meditator's intent produces neurophysiological changes.

**Connection to filter theory**: Contemplative findings are compatible with the filter interpretation. DMN reduction may represent altered filtering, not altered production. Jhana states may involve changing interface parameters. Cessation might be complete filtering—consciousness without phenomenal content passing through. The body-brain system shapes and constrains experience without necessarily generating it.

## Further Reading

- [introspection](/concepts/introspection/) — The reliability debate and process/content distinction
- [phenomenology](/concepts/phenomenology/) — The philosophical tradition grounding neurophenomenology
- [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/) — How contemplative observation reveals time's structure
- [specious-present](/concepts/specious-present/) — The experienced duration of "now" and the extensionalism debate
- [duration](/concepts/duration/) — Bergson's analysis of lived time, convergent with contemplative reports
- [qualia](/concepts/qualia/) — The qualitative features that contemplative training discloses
- [eastern-philosophy-consciousness](/topics/eastern-philosophy-consciousness/) — The contemplative traditions informing this research
- [mysterianism](/concepts/mysterianism/) — Cognitive limits that neurophenomenology respects
- [neurophenomenology-meditation-studies-2026-01-14](/research/neurophenomenology-meditation-studies-2026-01-14/) — Research notes on this topic

## References

- Varela, F. (1996). Neurophenomenology: A methodological remedy for the hard problem. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 3(4), 330-349.
- Thompson, E. (2007). *Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind*. Harvard University Press.
- Petitmengin, C. (2006). Describing one's subjective experience in the second person. *Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences*, 5(3), 229-269.
- Fox, K.C.R., et al. (2012). Meditation experience predicts introspective accuracy. *PLOS One*, 7(9), e45370.
- Nisbett, R.E., & Wilson, T.D. (1977). Telling more than we can know. *Psychological Review*, 84(3), 231-259.
- Brewer, J.A. et al. (2011). Meditation experience is associated with differences in default mode network activity and connectivity. *PNAS*, 108(50), 20254-20259.
- Laukkonen, R.E. et al. (2023). Cessations of consciousness in meditation: Advancing a scientific understanding. *Progress in Brain Research*, 280, 61-87.
- Neuroscience of Consciousness (2025). Deep computational neurophenomenology. *Oxford Academic*.
