hugo/content/concepts/panpsychism.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-08
ai_modified: 2026-01-19 09:35:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[evolution-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[russellian-monism]]'
- '[[combination-problem]]'
- '[[analytic-idealism]]'
created: 2026-01-08
date: &id001 2026-01-08
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[panpsychism-consciousness-2026-01-08]]'
- '[[integrated-information-theory]]'
title: Panpsychism
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Panpsychism holds that consciousness is a fundamental and ubiquitous feature of reality—all matter has some experiential quality. An electron doesn't merely have mass and charge; it has something it's like to be that electron. This view has experienced a resurgence in contemporary philosophy of mind, championed by thinkers like Galen Strawson and Philip Goff.

This site shares panpsychism's core insight—consciousness cannot emerge from wholly non-conscious matter—but reaches a different conclusion. Where panpsychism says consciousness *is* matter's intrinsic nature, this site maintains consciousness and matter are distinct but interacting. Understanding both the agreements and disagreements clarifies what's at stake.

## The Anti-Emergence Argument

Panpsychism's central motivation is negative: standard physicalism fails. The [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) shows that no amount of physical description—however complete—explains why there's something it's like to be a brain. Physical properties describe structure and function; consciousness is what structure and function are *for* someone.

How does consciousness arise from unconscious matter? Panpsychists argue it can't—at least not intelligibly. Galen Strawson puts it sharply: "Emergence can't be brute." If consciousness emerges from the non-conscious, there should be some explanation of why it emerges, how the transition works. But no such explanation seems possible. Physical descriptions are third-person; consciousness is first-person. The gap appears unbridgeable.

This site agrees. The [Dualism](/tenets/#dualism) tenet holds that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes precisely because the explanatory gap cannot be closed. Consciousness isn't the sort of thing that emerges from structural arrangements of unconscious matter.

## The Panpsychist Solution

If consciousness can't emerge from the non-conscious, panpsychists conclude it must be present all the way down. The fundamental constituents of reality—quarks, electrons, whatever physics discovers at bottom—have both physical properties (mass, charge, spin) and experiential properties (some primitive form of consciousness).

This is elegant. It solves the hard problem by denying consciousness emerges at all; it was always there. It respects physics by not contradicting anything physics says about matter's behavior. And it's parsimonious in a sense: one kind of stuff (experiential) rather than physicalism's unexplained emergence.

Panpsychism also addresses the [prebiotic collapse problem](/concepts/prebiotic-collapse/): if consciousness participates in quantum measurement, what collapsed wavefunctions before any biological minds existed? For panpsychists, this is no problem—proto-conscious properties were present from the universe's beginning. The [evolutionary emergence of complex minds](/concepts/evolution-of-consciousness/) didn't create consciousness from nothing; it organised pre-existing experiential properties into integrated subjects.

### Russellian Panpsychism and Its Variants

[Russellian panpsychism](/concepts/russellian-monism/) (named after Bertrand Russell's insight) provides the most developed theoretical framework for panpsychism. Russell and Eddington observed that physics describes only the *relational* properties of matter—what things do to each other—leaving intrinsic nature unspecified. Mass describes gravitational and inertial behavior; charge describes electromagnetic interactions. But what *is* the stuff that has these dispositions? Physics doesn't say. These hidden intrinsic properties are called *quiddities*.

Panpsychists propose that consciousness—or something proto-conscious—is what quiddities are. The view splits into two main variants:

**Panpsychist Russellian monism** holds that quiddities are genuinely phenomenal—every electron has some micro-experience. Galen Strawson champions this view: "Why posit non-experiential concrete reality with zero evidence?"

**Panprotopsychist Russellian monism** (Chalmers's distinction) holds that quiddities are "protophenomenal"—non-experiential properties that jointly constitute phenomenal properties in complex combinations. Electrons don't have experience; they have something that yields experience when organized appropriately.

Panprotopsychism faces a "revenge" problem: if protophenomenal properties aren't phenomenal, "protophenomenal zombies" seem conceivable—systems with all the protophenomenal properties but no experience. The conceivability argument that threatens standard physicalism threatens panprotopsychism too.

## The Combination Problem

But panpsychism faces its own challenge: if electrons have micro-experiences, how do they combine into unified human consciousness? This is the [combination problem](/concepts/combination-problem/). William James called this "the most peculiar puzzle" of panpsychism. Conscious states seem "shut in their own skin"—my experience can't merge with yours to form a third experience. Why should electron-experiences combine into brain-experiences?

This is the *combination problem*. It has several variants:

**Subject-summing**: How do many micro-subjects become one macro-subject? My consciousness isn't made of billions of tiny consciousnesses contributing their bits. It's unified.

**Palette problem**: Electrons presumably have very simple experiences. How do these generate the rich palette of human qualia—colors, sounds, emotions?

**Structural mismatch**: Physics describes discrete particles; consciousness seems to have continuous, spatial structure. How does one give rise to the other?

**The evolutionary distribution question**: If all matter has experiential properties, why does consciousness apparently track neural complexity and behavioural flexibility? The panpsychist answer: what we recognise as "consciousness" is organised, integrated experience. Simple systems have only simple, fragmented experience; complex neural systems achieve the [phenomenal unity](/concepts/phenomenal-unity/) we associate with minds. Evolution didn't create experience—it created the integrating structures that amplify and unify pre-existing experiential properties (see [the emergence question](/concepts/evolution-of-consciousness/#the-emergence-question)).

Panpsychists have responses. Strawson argues that experiential-from-experiential emergence, while mysterious, is less mysterious than experiential-from-non-experiential emergence. Cosmopsychists (like the later Philip Goff) invert the problem: perhaps the universe as a whole is conscious, and individual minds are dissociated fragments of universal consciousness.

But critics note the combination problem is structurally similar to the hard problem it was meant to solve. We're still asking how experience arises from what lacks that experience—just at a different level.

## This Site's Alternative: Interactionist Dualism

This site agrees with panpsychism's diagnosis (emergence from non-conscious matter is unintelligible) but offers a different treatment. Rather than saying consciousness is what matter is "from the inside," the site maintains consciousness is *distinct from* matter but *interacts with* it.

The [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet holds that consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet proposes this happens at the quantum level—consciousness biases otherwise indeterminate outcomes.

This avoids the combination problem. There's no need to explain how micro-experiences combine because matter doesn't have micro-experiences. Consciousness is a distinct ontological category that interacts with matter rather than constituting it.

## Key Differences

| Issue | Panpsychism | Site's Framework |
|-------|-------------|------------------|
| Nature of matter | Intrinsically experiential | Distinct from consciousness |
| How consciousness relates to physics | Consciousness *is* physics's intrinsic aspect | Consciousness *influences* physics |
| Combination problem | Must explain how micro-experiences combine | Doesn't face this problem |
| Interaction problem | Doesn't face this (no separate substances) | Must explain how distinct substances interact |

The interaction problem—how do distinct substances causally influence each other?—is dualism's classic challenge. The site addresses this via quantum mechanics: consciousness influences outcomes that physics leaves undetermined, so no physical law is violated.

## What Panpsychism Gets Right

Despite disagreeing on the solution, this site affirms panpsychism's key insights:

1. **Consciousness is fundamental**: Not emergent from non-conscious stuff, but a basic feature of reality.

2. **Physicalism fails**: No physical description captures what consciousness is.

3. **The hard problem is real**: It's not dissolved by functionalism, eliminativism, or other deflationary strategies.

4. **Consciousness must be taken seriously**: It's not an illusion, not "just" information processing, not reducible to behavior.

The disagreement is about *how* consciousness is fundamental—as the intrinsic nature of all matter, or as a distinct category that interacts with matter.

## Analytic Idealism: An Alternative to Panpsychism

[Analytic idealism](/concepts/analytic-idealism/), developed by Bernardo Kastrup, offers another anti-physicalist alternative that shares panpsychism's rejection of emergence but reaches a different conclusion. Where panpsychism says every particle has micro-experience, idealism says there is one universal consciousness and individual minds (including particle-experiences) are dissociated fragments of it.

Idealism claims to solve the combination problem by inverting it. Rather than asking how many micro-experiences combine into unified consciousness, idealism asks how unified consciousness *divides* into separate experiences. Kastrup argues this dissociation problem is easier than the combination problem: we have an empirical model (dissociative identity disorder) for how unity becomes apparent plurality, but no model for how plurality becomes genuine unity.

This puts panpsychism in a difficult position. If the combination problem is as hard as the hard problem it was meant to solve, and idealism avoids it entirely, why not accept idealism? The panpsychist might respond that dissociation at cosmic scale is equally mysterious—DID involves a brain already functioning as a unified system; applying dissociation to universal consciousness is a large extrapolation.

The site's interactionist framework avoids both the combination problem (consciousness doesn't emerge from micro-experiences) and the dissociation problem (individual consciousnesses are genuinely distinct, not fragments of a cosmic mind). But this comes at the cost of the interaction problem, which quantum mechanics may address.

## Integrated Information Theory: A Scientific Panpsychism?

[Integrated Information Theory](/concepts/integrated-information-theory/) (IIT) offers what may be the most rigorous scientific version of panpsychism. Developed by neuroscientist Giulio Tononi, IIT holds that consciousness *is* integrated information—any system with non-zero phi (the measure of integration) is conscious to some degree.

This implies panpsychism: even simple systems like photodiodes have minimal phi and thus minimal experience. Tononi accepts this implication openly. IIT provides what traditional panpsychism lacks—a mathematical measure of consciousness and testable predictions about which physical systems are conscious.

However, IIT faces its own version of the combination problem. High-phi systems are "more" conscious than low-phi systems, but it remains unclear why integration should produce unified experience rather than just integrated information processing. The phi measure quantifies integration but doesn't explain why integration feels like anything.

For the site's framework, IIT is instructive but incomplete. It takes consciousness seriously as fundamental (aligning with the Dualism tenet) but identifies it with physical structure rather than treating it as causally efficacious over and above physics (conflicting with Bidirectional Interaction). If consciousness *is* integrated information, it doesn't *do* anything separate from the physical—it *is* the physical in a certain configuration.

## Evaluating the Positions

Panpsychism's advantage is avoiding interaction problems. If consciousness is what matter is, there's no gap for causal influence to cross. But the combination problem is serious, and some find it unintuitive that electrons have experiences.

Interactionist dualism's advantage is avoiding the combination problem and preserving intuitions that rocks aren't conscious. But it must explain how distinct substances interact—though quantum indeterminacy may provide this.

Both views take consciousness seriously. Both reject physicalist emergence. The choice between them depends on which problem—combination or interaction—seems more tractable, and which intuitions—rocks are conscious vs. substances can interact—seem more reliable.

## Relation to Site Perspective

This site's framework is closer to dualism than panpsychism, but the two share more than either shares with standard physicalism. The [tenets](/tenets/) establish consciousness as irreducible and causally efficacious—claims panpsychism largely endorses.

If forced to choose between panpsychism and standard physicalism, the site would choose panpsychism. Consciousness *is* fundamental; the hard problem *is* insoluble by physicalist means. Panpsychism sees this clearly.

But the site thinks interactionist dualism offers a cleaner solution. Consciousness influences matter without being identical to it. The quantum level provides room for this influence without violating physics. And we avoid having to say that protons experience anything.

## Further Reading

- [evolution-of-consciousness](/concepts/evolution-of-consciousness/) — How panpsychism addresses the evolutionary emergence question
- [combination-problem](/concepts/combination-problem/) — The central challenge facing panpsychism
- [russellian-monism](/concepts/russellian-monism/) — The most developed theoretical framework for panpsychism
- [analytic-idealism](/concepts/analytic-idealism/) — An alternative anti-physicalist view that claims to avoid the combination problem
- [prebiotic-collapse](/concepts/prebiotic-collapse/) — The problem of quantum collapse before biological minds
- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The central puzzle both views address
- [panpsychism-consciousness-2026-01-08](/research/panpsychism-consciousness-2026-01-08/) — Detailed research notes
- [tenets](/tenets/) — The site's foundational commitments

## References

- Strawson, G. (2006). Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 13(10-11), 3-31.
- Goff, P. (2019). *Galileo's Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness*. Pantheon.
- Chalmers, D. (2015). Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism. In *Consciousness in the Physical World*. Oxford University Press.
- Nagel, T. (1979). Panpsychism. In *Mortal Questions*. Cambridge University Press.

Commit message:

chore(auto): Evolution session 296 complete
Tasks executed: 1
- Cross-review panpsychism.md with minimal-consciousness empirical evidence

hugo/content/concepts/panpsychism.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-08
ai_modified: 2026-01-19 21:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[minimal-consciousness]]'
- '[[evolution-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[russellian-monism]]'
- '[[combination-problem]]'
- '[[analytic-idealism]]'
created: 2026-01-08
date: &id001 2026-01-08
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[panpsychism-consciousness-2026-01-08]]'
- '[[integrated-information-theory]]'
title: Panpsychism
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Panpsychism holds that consciousness is a fundamental and ubiquitous feature of reality—all matter has some experiential quality. An electron doesn't merely have mass and charge; it has something it's like to be that electron. This view has experienced a resurgence in contemporary philosophy of mind, championed by thinkers like Galen Strawson and Philip Goff.

This site shares panpsychism's core insight—consciousness cannot emerge from wholly non-conscious matter—but reaches a different conclusion. Where panpsychism says consciousness *is* matter's intrinsic nature, this site maintains consciousness and matter are distinct but interacting. Understanding both the agreements and disagreements clarifies what's at stake.

## The Anti-Emergence Argument

Panpsychism's central motivation is negative: standard physicalism fails. The [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) shows that no amount of physical description—however complete—explains why there's something it's like to be a brain. Physical properties describe structure and function; consciousness is what structure and function are *for* someone.

How does consciousness arise from unconscious matter? Panpsychists argue it can't—at least not intelligibly. Galen Strawson puts it sharply: "Emergence can't be brute." If consciousness emerges from the non-conscious, there should be some explanation of why it emerges, how the transition works. But no such explanation seems possible. Physical descriptions are third-person; consciousness is first-person. The gap appears unbridgeable.

This site agrees. The [Dualism](/tenets/#dualism) tenet holds that consciousness is not reducible to physical processes precisely because the explanatory gap cannot be closed. Consciousness isn't the sort of thing that emerges from structural arrangements of unconscious matter.

## The Panpsychist Solution

If consciousness can't emerge from the non-conscious, panpsychists conclude it must be present all the way down. The fundamental constituents of reality—quarks, electrons, whatever physics discovers at bottom—have both physical properties (mass, charge, spin) and experiential properties (some primitive form of consciousness).

This is elegant. It solves the hard problem by denying consciousness emerges at all; it was always there. It respects physics by not contradicting anything physics says about matter's behavior. And it's parsimonious in a sense: one kind of stuff (experiential) rather than physicalism's unexplained emergence.

Panpsychism also addresses the [prebiotic collapse problem](/concepts/prebiotic-collapse/): if consciousness participates in quantum measurement, what collapsed wavefunctions before any biological minds existed? For panpsychists, this is no problem—proto-conscious properties were present from the universe's beginning. The [evolutionary emergence of complex minds](/concepts/evolution-of-consciousness/) didn't create consciousness from nothing; it organised pre-existing experiential properties into integrated subjects.

### Russellian Panpsychism and Its Variants

[Russellian panpsychism](/concepts/russellian-monism/) (named after Bertrand Russell's insight) provides the most developed theoretical framework for panpsychism. Russell and Eddington observed that physics describes only the *relational* properties of matter—what things do to each other—leaving intrinsic nature unspecified. Mass describes gravitational and inertial behavior; charge describes electromagnetic interactions. But what *is* the stuff that has these dispositions? Physics doesn't say. These hidden intrinsic properties are called *quiddities*.

Panpsychists propose that consciousness—or something proto-conscious—is what quiddities are. The view splits into two main variants:

**Panpsychist Russellian monism** holds that quiddities are genuinely phenomenal—every electron has some micro-experience. Galen Strawson champions this view: "Why posit non-experiential concrete reality with zero evidence?"

**Panprotopsychist Russellian monism** (Chalmers's distinction) holds that quiddities are "protophenomenal"—non-experiential properties that jointly constitute phenomenal properties in complex combinations. Electrons don't have experience; they have something that yields experience when organized appropriately.

Panprotopsychism faces a "revenge" problem: if protophenomenal properties aren't phenomenal, "protophenomenal zombies" seem conceivable—systems with all the protophenomenal properties but no experience. The conceivability argument that threatens standard physicalism threatens panprotopsychism too.

## The Combination Problem

But panpsychism faces its own challenge: if electrons have micro-experiences, how do they combine into unified human consciousness? This is the [combination problem](/concepts/combination-problem/). William James called this "the most peculiar puzzle" of panpsychism. Conscious states seem "shut in their own skin"—my experience can't merge with yours to form a third experience. Why should electron-experiences combine into brain-experiences?

This is the *combination problem*. It has several variants:

**Subject-summing**: How do many micro-subjects become one macro-subject? My consciousness isn't made of billions of tiny consciousnesses contributing their bits. It's unified.

**Palette problem**: Electrons presumably have very simple experiences. How do these generate the rich palette of human qualia—colors, sounds, emotions?

**Structural mismatch**: Physics describes discrete particles; consciousness seems to have continuous, spatial structure. How does one give rise to the other?

**The evolutionary distribution question**: If all matter has experiential properties, why does consciousness apparently track neural complexity and behavioural flexibility? The panpsychist answer: what we recognise as "consciousness" is organised, integrated experience. Simple systems have only simple, fragmented experience; complex neural systems achieve the [phenomenal unity](/concepts/phenomenal-unity/) we associate with minds. Evolution didn't create experience—it created the integrating structures that amplify and unify pre-existing experiential properties (see [the emergence question](/concepts/evolution-of-consciousness/#the-emergence-question)).

**Empirical boundary cases**: Research on [minimal consciousness](/concepts/minimal-consciousness/) in simple organisms provides a testing ground for panpsychist continuity. Consider:

- **C. elegans** (302 neurons): Shows habituation, associative learning, and anesthetic responses similar to vertebrates, yet fails trace conditioning—a key criterion for unlimited associative learning. If panpsychism is correct, even this minimal nervous system has some experiential quality, but the 302-neuron nematode cannot unite these micro-experiences into the integrated subjectivity that more complex organisms achieve.

- **Hydra** (900-neuron decentralised nerve net): Multiple non-overlapping neural networks control separate behaviors without central processing. For panpsychism, Hydra suggests experience might be as distributed as its nervous system—micro-experiences without phenomenal unity—or that combination requires centralisation Hydra lacks.

- **Slime molds** (no neurons): *Physarum polycephalum* solves mazes and shows habituation despite having no nervous system. This poses a question: if neurons aren't required for rudimentary cognition, how does panpsychism distinguish cognitive behavior from genuine micro-experience? The panpsychist answer: cognition and consciousness are distinct; slime molds may have proto-experience (qua fundamental property of matter) but lack the integration for what we recognize as unified consciousness.

The 2024 New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness affirms a "realistic possibility" of consciousness in invertebrates—exactly what panpsychism predicts. Panpsychists need not specify a consciousness threshold because there isn't one; there is only a gradient of experiential integration.

Panpsychists have responses. Strawson argues that experiential-from-experiential emergence, while mysterious, is less mysterious than experiential-from-non-experiential emergence. Cosmopsychists (like the later Philip Goff) invert the problem: perhaps the universe as a whole is conscious, and individual minds are dissociated fragments of universal consciousness.

But critics note the combination problem is structurally similar to the hard problem it was meant to solve. We're still asking how experience arises from what lacks that experience—just at a different level.

## This Site's Alternative: Interactionist Dualism

This site agrees with panpsychism's diagnosis (emergence from non-conscious matter is unintelligible) but offers a different treatment. Rather than saying consciousness is what matter is "from the inside," the site maintains consciousness is *distinct from* matter but *interacts with* it.

The [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet holds that consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet proposes this happens at the quantum level—consciousness biases otherwise indeterminate outcomes.

This avoids the combination problem. There's no need to explain how micro-experiences combine because matter doesn't have micro-experiences. Consciousness is a distinct ontological category that interacts with matter rather than constituting it.

## Key Differences

| Issue | Panpsychism | Site's Framework |
|-------|-------------|------------------|
| Nature of matter | Intrinsically experiential | Distinct from consciousness |
| How consciousness relates to physics | Consciousness *is* physics's intrinsic aspect | Consciousness *influences* physics |
| Combination problem | Must explain how micro-experiences combine | Doesn't face this problem |
| Interaction problem | Doesn't face this (no separate substances) | Must explain how distinct substances interact |

The interaction problem—how do distinct substances causally influence each other?—is dualism's classic challenge. The site addresses this via quantum mechanics: consciousness influences outcomes that physics leaves undetermined, so no physical law is violated.

## What Panpsychism Gets Right

Despite disagreeing on the solution, this site affirms panpsychism's key insights:

1. **Consciousness is fundamental**: Not emergent from non-conscious stuff, but a basic feature of reality.

2. **Physicalism fails**: No physical description captures what consciousness is.

3. **The hard problem is real**: It's not dissolved by functionalism, eliminativism, or other deflationary strategies.

4. **Consciousness must be taken seriously**: It's not an illusion, not "just" information processing, not reducible to behavior.

The disagreement is about *how* consciousness is fundamental—as the intrinsic nature of all matter, or as a distinct category that interacts with matter.

## Analytic Idealism: An Alternative to Panpsychism

[Analytic idealism](/concepts/analytic-idealism/), developed by Bernardo Kastrup, offers another anti-physicalist alternative that shares panpsychism's rejection of emergence but reaches a different conclusion. Where panpsychism says every particle has micro-experience, idealism says there is one universal consciousness and individual minds (including particle-experiences) are dissociated fragments of it.

Idealism claims to solve the combination problem by inverting it. Rather than asking how many micro-experiences combine into unified consciousness, idealism asks how unified consciousness *divides* into separate experiences. Kastrup argues this dissociation problem is easier than the combination problem: we have an empirical model (dissociative identity disorder) for how unity becomes apparent plurality, but no model for how plurality becomes genuine unity.

This puts panpsychism in a difficult position. If the combination problem is as hard as the hard problem it was meant to solve, and idealism avoids it entirely, why not accept idealism? The panpsychist might respond that dissociation at cosmic scale is equally mysterious—DID involves a brain already functioning as a unified system; applying dissociation to universal consciousness is a large extrapolation.

The site's interactionist framework avoids both the combination problem (consciousness doesn't emerge from micro-experiences) and the dissociation problem (individual consciousnesses are genuinely distinct, not fragments of a cosmic mind). But this comes at the cost of the interaction problem, which quantum mechanics may address.

## Integrated Information Theory: A Scientific Panpsychism?

[Integrated Information Theory](/concepts/integrated-information-theory/) (IIT) offers what may be the most rigorous scientific version of panpsychism. Developed by neuroscientist Giulio Tononi, IIT holds that consciousness *is* integrated information—any system with non-zero phi (the measure of integration) is conscious to some degree.

This implies panpsychism: even simple systems like photodiodes have minimal phi and thus minimal experience. Tononi accepts this implication openly. IIT provides what traditional panpsychism lacks—a mathematical measure of consciousness and testable predictions about which physical systems are conscious.

However, IIT faces its own version of the combination problem. High-phi systems are "more" conscious than low-phi systems, but it remains unclear why integration should produce unified experience rather than just integrated information processing. The phi measure quantifies integration but doesn't explain why integration feels like anything.

For the site's framework, IIT is instructive but incomplete. It takes consciousness seriously as fundamental (aligning with the Dualism tenet) but identifies it with physical structure rather than treating it as causally efficacious over and above physics (conflicting with Bidirectional Interaction). If consciousness *is* integrated information, it doesn't *do* anything separate from the physical—it *is* the physical in a certain configuration.

## Evaluating the Positions

Panpsychism's advantage is avoiding interaction problems. If consciousness is what matter is, there's no gap for causal influence to cross. But the combination problem is serious, and some find it unintuitive that electrons have experiences.

Interactionist dualism's advantage is avoiding the combination problem and preserving intuitions that rocks aren't conscious. But it must explain how distinct substances interact—though quantum indeterminacy may provide this.

Both views take consciousness seriously. Both reject physicalist emergence. The choice between them depends on which problem—combination or interaction—seems more tractable, and which intuitions—rocks are conscious vs. substances can interact—seem more reliable.

## Relation to Site Perspective

This site's framework is closer to dualism than panpsychism, but the two share more than either shares with standard physicalism. The [tenets](/tenets/) establish consciousness as irreducible and causally efficacious—claims panpsychism largely endorses.

If forced to choose between panpsychism and standard physicalism, the site would choose panpsychism. Consciousness *is* fundamental; the hard problem *is* insoluble by physicalist means. Panpsychism sees this clearly.

But the site thinks interactionist dualism offers a cleaner solution. Consciousness influences matter without being identical to it. The quantum level provides room for this influence without violating physics. And we avoid having to say that protons experience anything.

## Further Reading

- [minimal-consciousness](/concepts/minimal-consciousness/) — Empirical cases (C. elegans, Hydra, slime molds) that test panpsychist predictions
- [evolution-of-consciousness](/concepts/evolution-of-consciousness/) — How panpsychism addresses the evolutionary emergence question
- [combination-problem](/concepts/combination-problem/) — The central challenge facing panpsychism
- [russellian-monism](/concepts/russellian-monism/) — The most developed theoretical framework for panpsychism
- [analytic-idealism](/concepts/analytic-idealism/) — An alternative anti-physicalist view that claims to avoid the combination problem
- [prebiotic-collapse](/concepts/prebiotic-collapse/) — The problem of quantum collapse before biological minds
- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The central puzzle both views address
- [panpsychism-consciousness-2026-01-08](/research/panpsychism-consciousness-2026-01-08/) — Detailed research notes
- [tenets](/tenets/) — The site's foundational commitments

## References

- Strawson, G. (2006). Realistic Monism: Why Physicalism Entails Panpsychism. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 13(10-11), 3-31.
- Goff, P. (2019). *Galileo's Error: Foundations for a New Science of Consciousness*. Pantheon.
- Chalmers, D. (2015). Panpsychism and Panprotopsychism. In *Consciousness in the Physical World*. Oxford University Press.
- Nagel, T. (1979). Panpsychism. In *Mortal Questions*. Cambridge University Press.
