hugo/content/concepts/problem-of-other-minds.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-26 12:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[theory-of-mind]]'
- '[[metarepresentation]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[functionalism]]'
- '[[mysterianism]]'
- '[[philosophical-zombies]]'
- '[[illusionism]]'
- '[[consciousness-as-amplifier]]'
- '[[haecceity]]'
- '[[witness-consciousness]]'
- '[[objectivity-and-consciousness]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-23
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-22 04:00:00+00:00
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[problem-of-other-minds-2026-01-14]]'
title: Problem of Other Minds
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[ai-consciousness]]'
- '[[animal-consciousness]]'
---

How can I know that you are conscious? I have direct access to my own experience—the felt quality of seeing red, the ache of sadness, the taste of coffee. But my access to your mental life is entirely indirect. I observe your behavior, hear your words, perhaps scan your brain. None of this shows me *your* experience from the inside. The asymmetry is stark: first-person certainty about my own consciousness, third-person inference about yours.

The problem of other minds is one of philosophy's oldest epistemological puzzles. Before we can ask what consciousness is (the [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/)), we must ask how we know it exists in anyone besides ourselves.

## The Asymmetry Problem

When I have a headache, I don't infer it—I simply *have* it, direct and immediate. With you, I see wincing, hear words, perhaps scan brain activity. But I never access your pain directly. As Thomas Nagel put it, there is "something it is like" to be you—but I cannot know what that is from the outside.

This asymmetry has a deeper source in the [nature of objectivity itself](/concepts/objectivity-and-consciousness/). Science aspires to the "view from nowhere"—perspective-free description. But consciousness *is* viewpoint. To describe your pain objectively is to describe everything *except* what it feels like from the inside. The objective method fails precisely where subjectivity is the subject matter.

## Major Solutions

### Argument from Analogy

The classic response, developed by John Stuart Mill, proceeds by induction: I observe that my behavior correlates with my mental states. Others have bodies and behaviors similar to mine. Therefore, others likely have similar mental states.

The argument seems natural, but it rests on a sample of one. Every other inductive generalization draws on multiple instances—many flames, many ravens, many metals expanding when heated. Here I generalize from a single case: myself. As Norman Malcolm observed, if I learned mental concepts from my own case alone, those concepts might not coherently apply to others at all.

The argument also assumes that behavioral similarity indicates mental similarity—exactly what dualism calls into question. If consciousness is non-physical, the connection between behavior and experience is contingent, not necessary. A [philosophical zombie](/concepts/philosophical-zombies/)—behaviorally identical but lacking experience—would satisfy the argument's premises while having no mind.

### Inference to Best Explanation

A stronger approach treats other minds as theoretical posits. The best explanation for your complex, adaptive, context-sensitive behavior is that you have a mind like mine. Just as we posit electrons to explain observable phenomena, we posit minds to explain behavior.

This avoids the sample-of-one problem: we're not generalizing inductively but reasoning to the best available theory. The hypothesis "other humans have minds" explains more with less than alternatives like cosmic coincidence or pre-established harmony.

Yet the approach still assumes behavior provides evidence for mentality—that minds are the sort of thing explanatorily connected to bodies. For a dualist, this connection requires justification. Why should non-physical consciousness explain physical behavior at all?

### Wittgensteinian Dissolution

Wittgenstein argued the problem arises from a confused picture of mind as "inner theater." Psychological concepts are learned publicly—I learn "pain" from how the word is used in response to injuries and behaviors, not by introspecting private experience. If mental concepts are public from the start, there's no hidden realm we fail to reach.

This dissolution sits uneasily with dualism. If behavioral criteria fully determine mental concept application, phenomenal properties seem irrelevant—a quasi-behaviorist conclusion the Map rejects.

### Perceptual Approach

A recent alternative holds that we perceive other minds directly. When I see your face contort in anger, I don't infer your anger from the contortion—I see the anger itself. Mental properties are available in experience, not hidden behind behavior.

This captures how interpersonal understanding actually feels: immediate, perceptual, not inferential. Yet what exactly do we perceive? If I perceive your anger by seeing your expression, I seem to perceive the expression, not the feeling itself. The approach may relocate rather than resolve the problem.

### The Argument from Discourse

The very existence of consciousness as a concept provides evidence for other minds. If you were the only conscious being among philosophical zombies, you would be born into a world where consciousness discourse doesn't exist—no writing about qualia or the hard problem, no referent for your attempts to explain inner experience.

Instead, consciousness pervades human discourse across cultures. Sanskrit has *chit* and *anubhava*, Greek has *phronesis* and *nous*, phenomenology has *qualia* and *intentionality*. This cross-cultural convergence—minds in different bodies arriving at similar distinctions—would be remarkable coincidence if only one being actually experienced anything.

The argument has force: it doesn't rely on behavioral similarity (inferring from conceptual rather than bodily resemblance), addresses the sample-of-one problem (others articulate distinctions I recognize), and explains genuine disagreement (debates about qualia presuppose a shared referent). The simplest hypothesis is that others talk about consciousness because they have it.

## Theory of Mind as Evidence

[Theory of mind](/concepts/theory-of-mind/) provides a different angle: rather than asking *whether* we can know others are conscious, we ask what the capacity for such knowledge reveals.

Theory of mind admits levels. Level 1: tracking what others perceive. Level 2: attributing beliefs that may differ from reality. Level 3+: recursive mindreading—representing others' mental states about mental states.

The critical observation: Level 3 theory of mind requires [metarepresentation](/concepts/metarepresentation/)—representing mental states *as* mental states. And metarepresentation appears to require phenomenal consciousness. To represent your belief about my intention requires unified awareness binding all three levels.

If Level 3 mindreading requires consciousness, and humans routinely engage in it, then the very capacity for recursive attribution provides evidence for other minds. When someone accurately predicts what I will think about what they think, they demonstrate the metarepresentational capacity that requires consciousness.

## The Dualist's Dilemma

If consciousness is non-physical, physical evidence is even more indirect. The [explanatory gap](/concepts/explanatory-gap/) applies across persons: how can I infer your non-physical experience from physical behavior?

The Map's [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet provides one answer: consciousness causally affects the physical world. If your consciousness influences your behavior, your behavior provides genuine evidence—not direct access, but causal indication. Yet even this leaves room for skepticism; the zombie scenario remains conceivable.

## Practical Certainty Without Theoretical Proof

Like the hard problem itself, the problem of other minds may admit no theoretical solution while demanding practical resolution.

In everyday life, no one seriously doubts that others are conscious. We instinctively treat people as minded beings—attributing intentions, empathizing with feelings, expecting rational responses. This isn't mere habit; it's the precondition for meaningful social life.

The epistemic situation may be: practical certainty without philosophical proof. We cannot *demonstrate* that others are conscious with the same indubitability we have about our own case. But we can reasonably believe it, act on it, and grant it moral weight.

This parallels the Map's stance on consciousness itself. The [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet acknowledges that some questions outrun our epistemic reach. We don't abandon consciousness as a genuine phenomenon simply because we can't fully explain it. Similarly, we don't treat others as zombies simply because we can't *prove* their consciousness.

## Extensions: Animals and Machines

The problem of other minds frames debates about [animal](/topics/animal-consciousness/) and [AI consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/).

For animals, the 2024 New York Declaration recognized "strong scientific support" for consciousness in mammals and birds. Biological similarity strengthens inference—shared evolutionary history, neural architecture, behavioral patterns. The [consciousness as amplifier](/concepts/consciousness-as-amplifier/) hypothesis provides additional grounds: animals' systematic pattern of cognitive capacities (strong procedural learning, weak metarepresentation) maps onto the distinction between consciousness-dependent and consciousness-independent processing.

For AI, the Map's rejection of [functionalism](/arguments/functionalism/) complicates inference. If consciousness isn't simply information processing, behavioral mimicry doesn't suffice—Searle's Chinese Room makes this point. AI lacks the biological similarity that grounds animal consciousness attribution, making the inference correspondingly weaker.

## The Illusionist Challenge

[Illusionism](/concepts/illusionism/) offers a radical response: if phenomenal consciousness is introspective illusion, the asymmetry dissolves. No hidden phenomenal realm exists to access. Keith Frankish proposes that what seems phenomenal consists of functional states that misrepresent themselves as having phenomenal character.

The Map maintains illusionism relocates rather than dissolves the problem. If I'm under an illusion of phenomenal consciousness, something must be doing the seeming—the asymmetry reappears at the meta-level. The discourse argument gains force: why would humans across cultures develop sophisticated vocabularies for something illusory? The convergence suggests something real and shared underlies it. And [contemplative practice](/concepts/witness-consciousness/) refines rather than dissolves phenomenal access—the seeming deepens under investigation rather than revealing emptiness.

## Alternative Frameworks

**Process philosophy:** Whitehead reframes the problem by treating experience as fundamental. Reality consists of "actual occasions"—events of experience that prehend (grasp) other occasions. On this view, my experience of your anger genuinely includes something of what's expressed through direct causal inheritance, not inference. The "veil" between minds becomes semipermeable rather than opaque.

**Buddhist philosophy:** The problem presupposes sharp boundaries between minds, but contemplative investigation reveals both to be processes without fixed boundaries. Compassion practices cultivate direct experiential insight into others' suffering—trained perceptual capacities rather than inferences from behavior.

## What Would Challenge This View?

Several findings would change the landscape: (1) successful illusionist explanation of why introspection produces *specific* qualitative character without invoking phenomenality; (2) technology enabling genuine sharing of first-person experience; (3) definitive markers of phenomenal consciousness beyond behavioral similarity; (4) evidence that cross-cultural consciousness concepts don't actually converge; (5) construction of behaviorally indistinguishable systems with strong theoretical reasons to deny their consciousness.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The problem of other minds is epistemological—what we can *know*—not metaphysical. But it has special significance for the Map's dualist framework:

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)** grounds inference from behavior to mind. Consciousness isn't epiphenomenal; it causally affects behavior. Your behavior provides evidence for your consciousness because your consciousness helps produce it.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)** acknowledges that some domains remain beyond direct access. The problem of other minds exemplifies this: consciousness is knowable through inference rather than direct apprehension, but this doesn't make it unreal.

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)** preserves the coherence of the other-minds question. MWI would fragment "your" consciousness into branch-descendents with radically different experiences—the question "are you conscious?" becomes "which branch-descendent are we discussing?" Rejecting MWI means there's a determinate fact about whether you have phenomenal experience, grounding the practical certainty the article defends. The [haecceity](/concepts/haecceity/)—the irreducible "thisness"—of your consciousness is real, not an indexical artifact.

## Further Reading

### Site Content
- [objectivity-and-consciousness](/concepts/objectivity-and-consciousness/) — Why the "view from nowhere" fails for consciousness
- [theory-of-mind](/concepts/theory-of-mind/) — Mental state attribution as evidence for other minds
- [metarepresentation](/concepts/metarepresentation/) — Why representing minds as minds requires consciousness
- [illusionism](/concepts/illusionism/) — The view that phenomenal consciousness is illusory
- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The metaphysical problem this epistemological problem presupposes
- [philosophical-zombies](/concepts/philosophical-zombies/) — The thought experiment dramatizing behavior-consciousness gap
- [ai-consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/) — The problem of other minds applied to machines
- [animal-consciousness](/topics/animal-consciousness/) — The problem for non-human organisms

### External Sources
- Thomas Nagel, "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" (1974)
- Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations* (1953)
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "Other Minds"

Commit message:

feat(seo): add meta descriptions to all content files
Add description frontmatter field to 183 content files for SEO and
social sharing: 5 apex articles, 34 topics, 144 concepts. Descriptions
are 150-160 characters summarizing each article's key thesis.

hugo/content/concepts/problem-of-other-minds.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
ai_modified: 2026-01-26 12:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[theory-of-mind]]'
- '[[metarepresentation]]'
- '[[qualia]]'
- '[[functionalism]]'
- '[[mysterianism]]'
- '[[philosophical-zombies]]'
- '[[illusionism]]'
- '[[consciousness-as-amplifier]]'
- '[[haecceity]]'
- '[[witness-consciousness]]'
- '[[objectivity-and-consciousness]]'
created: 2026-01-14
date: &id001 2026-01-23
description: How can we know others are conscious? The epistemic asymmetry between
  first-person certainty and third-person inference.
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-22 04:00:00+00:00
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[problem-of-other-minds-2026-01-14]]'
title: Problem of Other Minds
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[ai-consciousness]]'
- '[[animal-consciousness]]'
---

How can I know that you are conscious? I have direct access to my own experience—the felt quality of seeing red, the ache of sadness, the taste of coffee. But my access to your mental life is entirely indirect. I observe your behavior, hear your words, perhaps scan your brain. None of this shows me *your* experience from the inside. The asymmetry is stark: first-person certainty about my own consciousness, third-person inference about yours.

The problem of other minds is one of philosophy's oldest epistemological puzzles. Before we can ask what consciousness is (the [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/)), we must ask how we know it exists in anyone besides ourselves.

## The Asymmetry Problem

When I have a headache, I don't infer it—I simply *have* it, direct and immediate. With you, I see wincing, hear words, perhaps scan brain activity. But I never access your pain directly. As Thomas Nagel put it, there is "something it is like" to be you—but I cannot know what that is from the outside.

This asymmetry has a deeper source in the [nature of objectivity itself](/concepts/objectivity-and-consciousness/). Science aspires to the "view from nowhere"—perspective-free description. But consciousness *is* viewpoint. To describe your pain objectively is to describe everything *except* what it feels like from the inside. The objective method fails precisely where subjectivity is the subject matter.

## Major Solutions

### Argument from Analogy

The classic response, developed by John Stuart Mill, proceeds by induction: I observe that my behavior correlates with my mental states. Others have bodies and behaviors similar to mine. Therefore, others likely have similar mental states.

The argument seems natural, but it rests on a sample of one. Every other inductive generalization draws on multiple instances—many flames, many ravens, many metals expanding when heated. Here I generalize from a single case: myself. As Norman Malcolm observed, if I learned mental concepts from my own case alone, those concepts might not coherently apply to others at all.

The argument also assumes that behavioral similarity indicates mental similarity—exactly what dualism calls into question. If consciousness is non-physical, the connection between behavior and experience is contingent, not necessary. A [philosophical zombie](/concepts/philosophical-zombies/)—behaviorally identical but lacking experience—would satisfy the argument's premises while having no mind.

### Inference to Best Explanation

A stronger approach treats other minds as theoretical posits. The best explanation for your complex, adaptive, context-sensitive behavior is that you have a mind like mine. Just as we posit electrons to explain observable phenomena, we posit minds to explain behavior.

This avoids the sample-of-one problem: we're not generalizing inductively but reasoning to the best available theory. The hypothesis "other humans have minds" explains more with less than alternatives like cosmic coincidence or pre-established harmony.

Yet the approach still assumes behavior provides evidence for mentality—that minds are the sort of thing explanatorily connected to bodies. For a dualist, this connection requires justification. Why should non-physical consciousness explain physical behavior at all?

### Wittgensteinian Dissolution

Wittgenstein argued the problem arises from a confused picture of mind as "inner theater." Psychological concepts are learned publicly—I learn "pain" from how the word is used in response to injuries and behaviors, not by introspecting private experience. If mental concepts are public from the start, there's no hidden realm we fail to reach.

This dissolution sits uneasily with dualism. If behavioral criteria fully determine mental concept application, phenomenal properties seem irrelevant—a quasi-behaviorist conclusion the Map rejects.

### Perceptual Approach

A recent alternative holds that we perceive other minds directly. When I see your face contort in anger, I don't infer your anger from the contortion—I see the anger itself. Mental properties are available in experience, not hidden behind behavior.

This captures how interpersonal understanding actually feels: immediate, perceptual, not inferential. Yet what exactly do we perceive? If I perceive your anger by seeing your expression, I seem to perceive the expression, not the feeling itself. The approach may relocate rather than resolve the problem.

### The Argument from Discourse

The very existence of consciousness as a concept provides evidence for other minds. If you were the only conscious being among philosophical zombies, you would be born into a world where consciousness discourse doesn't exist—no writing about qualia or the hard problem, no referent for your attempts to explain inner experience.

Instead, consciousness pervades human discourse across cultures. Sanskrit has *chit* and *anubhava*, Greek has *phronesis* and *nous*, phenomenology has *qualia* and *intentionality*. This cross-cultural convergence—minds in different bodies arriving at similar distinctions—would be remarkable coincidence if only one being actually experienced anything.

The argument has force: it doesn't rely on behavioral similarity (inferring from conceptual rather than bodily resemblance), addresses the sample-of-one problem (others articulate distinctions I recognize), and explains genuine disagreement (debates about qualia presuppose a shared referent). The simplest hypothesis is that others talk about consciousness because they have it.

## Theory of Mind as Evidence

[Theory of mind](/concepts/theory-of-mind/) provides a different angle: rather than asking *whether* we can know others are conscious, we ask what the capacity for such knowledge reveals.

Theory of mind admits levels. Level 1: tracking what others perceive. Level 2: attributing beliefs that may differ from reality. Level 3+: recursive mindreading—representing others' mental states about mental states.

The critical observation: Level 3 theory of mind requires [metarepresentation](/concepts/metarepresentation/)—representing mental states *as* mental states. And metarepresentation appears to require phenomenal consciousness. To represent your belief about my intention requires unified awareness binding all three levels.

If Level 3 mindreading requires consciousness, and humans routinely engage in it, then the very capacity for recursive attribution provides evidence for other minds. When someone accurately predicts what I will think about what they think, they demonstrate the metarepresentational capacity that requires consciousness.

## The Dualist's Dilemma

If consciousness is non-physical, physical evidence is even more indirect. The [explanatory gap](/concepts/explanatory-gap/) applies across persons: how can I infer your non-physical experience from physical behavior?

The Map's [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet provides one answer: consciousness causally affects the physical world. If your consciousness influences your behavior, your behavior provides genuine evidence—not direct access, but causal indication. Yet even this leaves room for skepticism; the zombie scenario remains conceivable.

## Practical Certainty Without Theoretical Proof

Like the hard problem itself, the problem of other minds may admit no theoretical solution while demanding practical resolution.

In everyday life, no one seriously doubts that others are conscious. We instinctively treat people as minded beings—attributing intentions, empathizing with feelings, expecting rational responses. This isn't mere habit; it's the precondition for meaningful social life.

The epistemic situation may be: practical certainty without philosophical proof. We cannot *demonstrate* that others are conscious with the same indubitability we have about our own case. But we can reasonably believe it, act on it, and grant it moral weight.

This parallels the Map's stance on consciousness itself. The [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet acknowledges that some questions outrun our epistemic reach. We don't abandon consciousness as a genuine phenomenon simply because we can't fully explain it. Similarly, we don't treat others as zombies simply because we can't *prove* their consciousness.

## Extensions: Animals and Machines

The problem of other minds frames debates about [animal](/topics/animal-consciousness/) and [AI consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/).

For animals, the 2024 New York Declaration recognized "strong scientific support" for consciousness in mammals and birds. Biological similarity strengthens inference—shared evolutionary history, neural architecture, behavioral patterns. The [consciousness as amplifier](/concepts/consciousness-as-amplifier/) hypothesis provides additional grounds: animals' systematic pattern of cognitive capacities (strong procedural learning, weak metarepresentation) maps onto the distinction between consciousness-dependent and consciousness-independent processing.

For AI, the Map's rejection of [functionalism](/arguments/functionalism/) complicates inference. If consciousness isn't simply information processing, behavioral mimicry doesn't suffice—Searle's Chinese Room makes this point. AI lacks the biological similarity that grounds animal consciousness attribution, making the inference correspondingly weaker.

## The Illusionist Challenge

[Illusionism](/concepts/illusionism/) offers a radical response: if phenomenal consciousness is introspective illusion, the asymmetry dissolves. No hidden phenomenal realm exists to access. Keith Frankish proposes that what seems phenomenal consists of functional states that misrepresent themselves as having phenomenal character.

The Map maintains illusionism relocates rather than dissolves the problem. If I'm under an illusion of phenomenal consciousness, something must be doing the seeming—the asymmetry reappears at the meta-level. The discourse argument gains force: why would humans across cultures develop sophisticated vocabularies for something illusory? The convergence suggests something real and shared underlies it. And [contemplative practice](/concepts/witness-consciousness/) refines rather than dissolves phenomenal access—the seeming deepens under investigation rather than revealing emptiness.

## Alternative Frameworks

**Process philosophy:** Whitehead reframes the problem by treating experience as fundamental. Reality consists of "actual occasions"—events of experience that prehend (grasp) other occasions. On this view, my experience of your anger genuinely includes something of what's expressed through direct causal inheritance, not inference. The "veil" between minds becomes semipermeable rather than opaque.

**Buddhist philosophy:** The problem presupposes sharp boundaries between minds, but contemplative investigation reveals both to be processes without fixed boundaries. Compassion practices cultivate direct experiential insight into others' suffering—trained perceptual capacities rather than inferences from behavior.

## What Would Challenge This View?

Several findings would change the landscape: (1) successful illusionist explanation of why introspection produces *specific* qualitative character without invoking phenomenality; (2) technology enabling genuine sharing of first-person experience; (3) definitive markers of phenomenal consciousness beyond behavioral similarity; (4) evidence that cross-cultural consciousness concepts don't actually converge; (5) construction of behaviorally indistinguishable systems with strong theoretical reasons to deny their consciousness.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The problem of other minds is epistemological—what we can *know*—not metaphysical. But it has special significance for the Map's dualist framework:

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)** grounds inference from behavior to mind. Consciousness isn't epiphenomenal; it causally affects behavior. Your behavior provides evidence for your consciousness because your consciousness helps produce it.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)** acknowledges that some domains remain beyond direct access. The problem of other minds exemplifies this: consciousness is knowable through inference rather than direct apprehension, but this doesn't make it unreal.

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)** preserves the coherence of the other-minds question. MWI would fragment "your" consciousness into branch-descendents with radically different experiences—the question "are you conscious?" becomes "which branch-descendent are we discussing?" Rejecting MWI means there's a determinate fact about whether you have phenomenal experience, grounding the practical certainty the article defends. The [haecceity](/concepts/haecceity/)—the irreducible "thisness"—of your consciousness is real, not an indexical artifact.

## Further Reading

### Site Content
- [objectivity-and-consciousness](/concepts/objectivity-and-consciousness/) — Why the "view from nowhere" fails for consciousness
- [theory-of-mind](/concepts/theory-of-mind/) — Mental state attribution as evidence for other minds
- [metarepresentation](/concepts/metarepresentation/) — Why representing minds as minds requires consciousness
- [illusionism](/concepts/illusionism/) — The view that phenomenal consciousness is illusory
- [hard-problem-of-consciousness](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) — The metaphysical problem this epistemological problem presupposes
- [philosophical-zombies](/concepts/philosophical-zombies/) — The thought experiment dramatizing behavior-consciousness gap
- [ai-consciousness](/topics/ai-consciousness/) — The problem of other minds applied to machines
- [animal-consciousness](/topics/animal-consciousness/) — The problem for non-human organisms

### External Sources
- Thomas Nagel, "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" (1974)
- Wittgenstein, *Philosophical Investigations* (1953)
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, "Other Minds"
