hugo/content/concepts/quantum-interpretations.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-17
ai_modified: 2026-01-17 01:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
- '[[retrocausality]]'
- '[[many-worlds]]'
- '[[collapse-and-time]]'
- '[[relational-quantum-mechanics]]'
- '[[multi-mind-collapse-problem]]'
created: 2026-01-17
date: &id001 2026-01-17
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[qm-interpretations-beyond-mwi-2026-01-16]]'
title: Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Quantum mechanics is our best physical theory, yet physicists fundamentally disagree about what it means. A 2025 Nature survey found that no single interpretation commands majority support. This matters for consciousness studies: different interpretations have radically different implications for whether consciousness plays any role in physics.

This site explicitly rejects the [Many-Worlds Interpretation](/arguments/many-worlds/) (MWI). But what are the alternatives, and which best aligns with the framework that consciousness participates in physical reality?

## The Measurement Problem

All interpretations respond to the [measurement problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/): quantum systems exist in superposition (multiple states simultaneously) until measured, at which point a single definite outcome appears. What causes this transition? Why do we never observe macroscopic superpositions?

Answers fall into three categories:
1. **Collapse interpretations**: Something real happens at measurement—the wave function collapses
2. **No-collapse interpretations**: The wave function never collapses; apparent collapse is an artifact of our perspective
3. **Epistemic interpretations**: The wave function represents knowledge, not reality; "collapse" is just updating beliefs

## The Major Interpretations

### Copenhagen Interpretation (Baseline)

**Core claims:**
- The wave function represents knowledge about a system, not the system itself
- Measurement causes collapse, but "measurement" is undefined
- Classical apparatus is assumed to exist alongside quantum systems

**Consciousness role:** The original Copenhagen avoided the question by requiring classical measuring apparatus. Von Neumann and Wigner later suggested consciousness might be the collapse trigger, but this isn't standard Copenhagen.

**Site compatibility:** Moderate. Copenhagen's undefined measurement leaves logical space for consciousness, but its instrumentalism conflicts with this site's realist commitments about consciousness.

### Bohmian Mechanics (Pilot-Wave Theory)

**Core claims:**
- Particles have definite positions at all times, guided by a "pilot wave"
- The wave function evolves unitarily forever—no collapse
- Fully deterministic: apparent randomness reflects ignorance of hidden variables (particle positions)

**Consciousness role:** Minimal to none. Bohmian mechanics is designed to eliminate the observer. There is no collapse for consciousness to participate in. Outcomes are determined by the pilot wave.

**Site compatibility:** **Low.** If Bohmian mechanics is correct, the [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet has no work to do. Consciousness cannot select outcomes because outcomes are determined. Free will would require a different mechanism entirely.

**Why the site rejects this:**
1. **Determinism conflicts with free will phenomenology.** The phenomenology of effort and genuine choice would be illusory.
2. **Hidden variables seem unparsimonious.** If consciousness solves the measurement problem, hidden variables are unnecessary.
3. **Tension with relativity.** Pilot-wave guidance requires instantaneous non-local influences.

### QBism (Quantum Bayesianism)

**Core claims:**
- Quantum states represent an agent's subjective beliefs, not objective reality
- Probabilities are Bayesian (subjective), updated upon measurement
- "Collapse" is belief update, not a physical process
- Different agents can consistently assign different states to the same system

**Consciousness role:** Paradoxical. QBism makes agents central—only agents have quantum states (beliefs). But QBism denies wave functions are real, so there's nothing physical for consciousness to collapse. The agent's experience is epistemically fundamental but ontologically unexplained.

**Site compatibility:** Mixed. QBism's agent-centrality echoes this site's emphasis on conscious subjects. But QBism's anti-realism about quantum states conflicts with the site's commitment to real conscious states that make a causal difference.

### Relational Quantum Mechanics

**Core claims:**
- Physical properties exist only relative to observers
- There is no absolute, observer-independent state
- Different observers can consistently attribute different states
- "Observer" means any physical system, not necessarily conscious

**Consciousness role:** None. Rovelli is explicit: "There is nothing subjective, idealistic, or mentalistic, in RQM." The interpretation succeeds specifically by removing consciousness from measurement. Any physical system—a rock, a photon detector, a brain—is equally an "observer" whose interactions produce relative facts.

**Why this matters:** RQM elegantly dissolves the [multi-mind-collapse-problem](/concepts/multi-mind-collapse-problem/)—if facts are relative to each observer and need not agree until observers interact, there's no coordination paradox. But this elegance comes at the cost of mental causation. See [relational-quantum-mechanics](/concepts/relational-quantum-mechanics/) for detailed treatment.

**Site compatibility:** **Low.** RQM explicitly removes consciousness's special role, directly conflicting with the [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet. While RQM shares the site's rejection of many-worlds, it provides no mechanism for consciousness to influence physical outcomes.

### Transactional Interpretation (TI) and Two-State Vector Formalism (TSVF)

**Core claims (TI):**
- Quantum events involve "handshakes" between forward-in-time (retarded) and backward-in-time (advanced) waves
- A "transaction" between emitter and absorber constitutes a measurement
- Time-symmetric: future boundary conditions matter as much as past

**Core claims (TSVF):**
- Complete physical description requires both forward-evolving and backward-evolving quantum states
- Allows "weak values" with unusual properties
- Explicitly retrocausal

**Consciousness role:** Significant. Time-symmetric interpretations allow consciousness to select "which transaction completes" atemporally. Consciousness need not cause collapse *at* a moment—it participates in determining which correlations hold across time.

**Site compatibility:** **High.** These interpretations align closely with this site's use of [retrocausality](/concepts/retrocausality/) to resolve the Libet problem. If consciousness operates atemporally—selecting which temporal history becomes real—then TI/TSVF provide the physics for this "atemporal selection." The [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) article already draws on this framework.

### Objective Collapse Theories (GRW, CSL, Penrose)

**Core claims:**
- Wave function collapse is a real physical process occurring spontaneously
- No observer required—collapse happens at a certain rate or threshold
- GRW: spontaneous localization events occur randomly
- CSL: continuous spontaneous localization driven by noise
- Penrose: gravitational self-energy threshold triggers collapse

**Consciousness role (standard):** Low. If collapse happens physically according to GRW/CSL parameters, consciousness doesn't cause it.

**Consciousness role (variants):**
- **Consciousness-integrated CSL** (Kremnizer-Ranchin, Okon-Sebastian): Integrated information (Φ) affects collapse rate. Consciousness modulates collapse rather than causing it.
- **Penrose-Hameroff:** Objective reduction occurs at gravitational threshold, but consciousness is what the reduction *produces*. Collapse constitutes consciousness rather than being caused by it.

**Site compatibility:** Moderate to High. The site's position is compatible with either "consciousness causes collapse" or "consciousness modulates collapse." What matters is that consciousness participates in determining definite outcomes—whether as cause, modulator, or constitutive process.

## Comparison Table

| Interpretation | Collapse? | Deterministic? | Consciousness Role | Site Alignment |
|---------------|-----------|----------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Copenhagen | Yes (undefined) | No | Possible but unclear | Moderate |
| Bohmian | No | Yes | None | Low |
| MWI | No (global) | Yes | None | **Rejected** |
| QBism | Epistemic only | N/A | Agent-centered but anti-realist | Mixed |
| Relational QM | Relational | No | **None** (observer = any physical system) | **Low** |
| **Transactional/TSVF** | Via transaction | No | **Atemporal selection** | **High** |
| GRW/CSL | Physical process | No | None (standard) / Modulation (variants) | Moderate-High |
| Penrose OR | Gravitational | No | Constituted by collapse | Moderate |

## Why the Site Favors Time-Symmetric Interpretations

The transactional interpretation and TSVF align with several site commitments:

### 1. Resolving the Libet Problem

The [Libet experiments](/concepts/libet-experiments/) show neural activity precedes conscious awareness of decisions. If causation runs only forward in time, consciousness seems epiphenomenal. But time-symmetric interpretations allow consciousness to select outcomes atemporally—determining which temporal sequence becomes real, including the neural activity that "preceded" the decision.

### 2. Free Will Mechanism

The [free-will](/topics/free-will/) article's central proposal—that consciousness selects among quantum possibilities—requires an interpretation where such selection is coherent. Time-symmetric interpretations provide this: consciousness participates in determining which "transaction" completes, which correlations hold across time.

### 3. No Collapse Timing Problem

If consciousness causes collapse at a moment, we face questions about which moment, what triggers it, etc. Time-symmetric interpretations dissolve this: the selection isn't at a moment but determines which moments exist.

## Why the Site Rejects MWI

The [many-worlds](/arguments/many-worlds/) article details five arguments against MWI:

1. **Ontological extravagance**: Infinite parallel universes for each quantum event
2. **Indexical identity problem**: "You" are distributed across branches with incompatible experiences
3. **Probability problem**: Deriving Born rule probabilities from counting branches fails
4. **Preferred basis problem**: Why branches split along particular observables
5. **Consciousness unaddressed**: MWI explains superposition but not why there's experience at all

The [No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds) tenet encodes this rejection.

## Implications for the Site's Framework

The interpretive landscape remains genuinely open. This gives the site's position—consciousness participates in determining quantum outcomes—legitimate standing. The question is not whether physics rules this out (it doesn't) but which interpretation best explains both quantum phenomena and the existence of consciousness.

Interpretations that eliminate consciousness (Bohmian mechanics, MWI) or treat it as purely epistemic (QBism) don't explain why consciousness exists. The site's framework takes consciousness as explanatory target, not philosophical afterthought.

## Further Reading

- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — The problem all interpretations address
- [many-worlds](/arguments/many-worlds/) — Why this site rejects MWI
- [relational-quantum-mechanics](/concepts/relational-quantum-mechanics/) — Rovelli's interpretation and why the site rejects it
- [multi-mind-collapse-problem](/concepts/multi-mind-collapse-problem/) — How multiple conscious observers coordinate
- [retrocausality](/concepts/retrocausality/) — Time-symmetric causation and free will
- [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) — How collapse relates to temporal experience
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Specific mechanisms for consciousness-physics interface
- [tenets](/tenets/) — Foundational commitments including No Many Worlds

## References

- Nature Physics Survey (August 2025): Physicist interpretations of quantum mechanics
- Cramer, J. G. (1986). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. *Reviews of Modern Physics*.
- Aharonov, Y., Bergmann, P. G., & Lebowitz, J. L. (1964). Time symmetry in the quantum process of measurement. *Physical Review*.
- Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986). Unified dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic systems. *Physical Review D*.
- Kastner, R. E. (2022). *The Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics*. Cambridge University Press.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Retrocausality in Quantum Mechanics."
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Collapse Theories."

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - measurement-problem MWI arguments
Task: Cross-review measurement-problem.md with MWI rejection arguments
Session: 324

Enhanced MWI section with substantive engagement:
- Expanded probability problem with decision-theoretic critique
- Strengthened consciousness-unexplained argument (Bidirectional Interaction incompatibility)
- Connected indexical problem to haecceity concept
- Linked ontological extravagance to Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet
- Fixed Frauchiger-Renner date and added citation

hugo/content/concepts/quantum-interpretations.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-17
ai_modified: 2026-01-19 12:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[many-worlds]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
- '[[retrocausality]]'
- '[[haecceity]]'
- '[[collapse-and-time]]'
- '[[relational-quantum-mechanics]]'
- '[[multi-mind-collapse-problem]]'
created: 2026-01-17
date: &id001 2026-01-17
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[qm-interpretations-beyond-mwi-2026-01-16]]'
title: Interpretations of Quantum Mechanics
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Quantum mechanics is our best physical theory, yet physicists fundamentally disagree about what it means. A 2025 Nature survey found that no single interpretation commands majority support. This matters for consciousness studies: different interpretations have radically different implications for whether consciousness plays any role in physics.

This site explicitly rejects the [Many-Worlds Interpretation](/arguments/many-worlds/) (MWI) on five grounds: ontological extravagance, the indexical identity problem, the probability problem, the preferred basis problem, and MWI's failure to explain why consciousness exists at all. But what are the alternatives, and which best aligns with the framework that consciousness participates in physical reality?

## The Measurement Problem

All interpretations respond to the [measurement problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/): quantum systems exist in superposition (multiple states simultaneously) until measured, at which point a single definite outcome appears. What causes this transition? Why do we never observe macroscopic superpositions?

Answers fall into three categories:
1. **Collapse interpretations**: Something real happens at measurement—the wave function collapses
2. **No-collapse interpretations**: The wave function never collapses; apparent collapse is an artifact of our perspective
3. **Epistemic interpretations**: The wave function represents knowledge, not reality; "collapse" is just updating beliefs

## The Major Interpretations

### Copenhagen Interpretation (Baseline)

**Core claims:**
- The wave function represents knowledge about a system, not the system itself
- Measurement causes collapse, but "measurement" is undefined
- Classical apparatus is assumed to exist alongside quantum systems

**Consciousness role:** The original Copenhagen avoided the question by requiring classical measuring apparatus. Von Neumann and Wigner later suggested consciousness might be the collapse trigger, but this isn't standard Copenhagen.

**Site compatibility:** Moderate. Copenhagen's undefined measurement leaves logical space for consciousness, but its instrumentalism conflicts with this site's realist commitments about consciousness.

### Bohmian Mechanics (Pilot-Wave Theory)

**Core claims:**
- Particles have definite positions at all times, guided by a "pilot wave"
- The wave function evolves unitarily forever—no collapse
- Fully deterministic: apparent randomness reflects ignorance of hidden variables (particle positions)

**Consciousness role:** Minimal to none. Bohmian mechanics is designed to eliminate the observer. There is no collapse for consciousness to participate in. Outcomes are determined by the pilot wave.

**Site compatibility:** **Low.** If Bohmian mechanics is correct, the [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) tenet has no work to do. Consciousness cannot select outcomes because outcomes are determined. Free will would require a different mechanism entirely.

**Why the site rejects this:**
1. **Determinism conflicts with free will phenomenology.** The phenomenology of effort and genuine choice would be illusory.
2. **Hidden variables seem unparsimonious.** If consciousness solves the measurement problem, hidden variables are unnecessary.
3. **Tension with relativity.** Pilot-wave guidance requires instantaneous non-local influences.

### QBism (Quantum Bayesianism)

**Core claims:**
- Quantum states represent an agent's subjective beliefs, not objective reality
- Probabilities are Bayesian (subjective), updated upon measurement
- "Collapse" is belief update, not a physical process
- Different agents can consistently assign different states to the same system

**Consciousness role:** Paradoxical. QBism makes agents central—only agents have quantum states (beliefs). But QBism denies wave functions are real, so there's nothing physical for consciousness to collapse. The agent's experience is epistemically fundamental but ontologically unexplained.

**Site compatibility:** Mixed. QBism's agent-centrality echoes this site's emphasis on conscious subjects. But QBism's anti-realism about quantum states conflicts with the site's commitment to real conscious states that make a causal difference.

### Relational Quantum Mechanics

**Core claims:**
- Physical properties exist only relative to observers
- There is no absolute, observer-independent state
- Different observers can consistently attribute different states
- "Observer" means any physical system, not necessarily conscious

**Consciousness role:** None. Rovelli is explicit: "There is nothing subjective, idealistic, or mentalistic, in RQM." The interpretation succeeds specifically by removing consciousness from measurement. Any physical system—a rock, a photon detector, a brain—is equally an "observer" whose interactions produce relative facts.

**Why this matters:** RQM elegantly dissolves the [multi-mind-collapse-problem](/concepts/multi-mind-collapse-problem/)—if facts are relative to each observer and need not agree until observers interact, there's no coordination paradox. But this elegance comes at the cost of mental causation. See [relational-quantum-mechanics](/concepts/relational-quantum-mechanics/) for detailed treatment.

**Site compatibility:** **Low.** RQM explicitly removes consciousness's special role, directly conflicting with the [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet. While RQM shares the site's rejection of many-worlds, it provides no mechanism for consciousness to influence physical outcomes.

### Transactional Interpretation (TI) and Two-State Vector Formalism (TSVF)

**Core claims (TI):**
- Quantum events involve "handshakes" between forward-in-time (retarded) and backward-in-time (advanced) waves
- A "transaction" between emitter and absorber constitutes a measurement
- Time-symmetric: future boundary conditions matter as much as past

**Core claims (TSVF):**
- Complete physical description requires both forward-evolving and backward-evolving quantum states
- Allows "weak values" with unusual properties
- Explicitly retrocausal

**Consciousness role:** Significant. Time-symmetric interpretations allow consciousness to select "which transaction completes" atemporally. Consciousness need not cause collapse *at* a moment—it participates in determining which correlations hold across time.

**Site compatibility:** **High.** These interpretations align closely with this site's use of [retrocausality](/concepts/retrocausality/) to resolve the Libet problem. If consciousness operates atemporally—selecting which temporal history becomes real—then TI/TSVF provide the physics for this "atemporal selection." The [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) article already draws on this framework.

### Objective Collapse Theories (GRW, CSL, Penrose)

**Core claims:**
- Wave function collapse is a real physical process occurring spontaneously
- No observer required—collapse happens at a certain rate or threshold
- GRW: spontaneous localization events occur randomly
- CSL: continuous spontaneous localization driven by noise
- Penrose: gravitational self-energy threshold triggers collapse

**Consciousness role (standard):** Low. If collapse happens physically according to GRW/CSL parameters, consciousness doesn't cause it.

**Consciousness role (variants):**
- **Consciousness-integrated CSL** (Kremnizer-Ranchin, Okon-Sebastian): Integrated information (Φ) affects collapse rate. Consciousness modulates collapse rather than causing it.
- **Penrose-Hameroff:** Objective reduction occurs at gravitational threshold, but consciousness is what the reduction *produces*. Collapse constitutes consciousness rather than being caused by it.

**Site compatibility:** Moderate to High. The site's position is compatible with either "consciousness causes collapse" or "consciousness modulates collapse." What matters is that consciousness participates in determining definite outcomes—whether as cause, modulator, or constitutive process.

## Comparison Table

| Interpretation | Collapse? | Deterministic? | Consciousness Role | Site Alignment |
|---------------|-----------|----------------|-------------------|----------------|
| Copenhagen | Yes (undefined) | No | Possible but unclear | Moderate |
| Bohmian | No | Yes | None | Low |
| MWI | No (global) | Yes | None (all outcomes occur) | **Rejected** (five arguments) |
| QBism | Epistemic only | N/A | Agent-centered but anti-realist | Mixed |
| Relational QM | Relational | No | **None** (observer = any physical system) | **Low** |
| **Transactional/TSVF** | Via transaction | No | **Atemporal selection** | **High** |
| GRW/CSL | Physical process | No | None (standard) / Modulation (variants) | Moderate-High |
| Penrose OR | Gravitational | No | Constituted by collapse | Moderate |

## Why the Site Favors Time-Symmetric Interpretations

The transactional interpretation and TSVF align with several site commitments:

### 1. Resolving the Libet Problem

The [Libet experiments](/concepts/libet-experiments/) show neural activity precedes conscious awareness of decisions. If causation runs only forward in time, consciousness seems epiphenomenal. But time-symmetric interpretations allow consciousness to select outcomes atemporally—determining which temporal sequence becomes real, including the neural activity that "preceded" the decision.

### 2. Free Will Mechanism

The [free-will](/topics/free-will/) article's central proposal—that consciousness selects among quantum possibilities—requires an interpretation where such selection is coherent. Time-symmetric interpretations provide this: consciousness participates in determining which "transaction" completes, which correlations hold across time.

### 3. No Collapse Timing Problem

If consciousness causes collapse at a moment, we face questions about which moment, what triggers it, etc. Time-symmetric interpretations dissolve this: the selection isn't at a moment but determines which moments exist.

## Why the Site Rejects MWI

The [many-worlds](/arguments/many-worlds/) article presents five detailed arguments against MWI:

1. **Ontological extravagance**: MWI posits continuous branching—trillions of events per second, each creating new universes. MWI defenders (Deutsch, Wallace) appeal to parsimony of *laws*, but the [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet reminds us that simplicity is unreliable when knowledge is incomplete.

2. **Indexical identity problem**: Before measurement, one you; after, many equally real continuations. Yet you anticipate *one* future experience. This [haecceitistic](/concepts/haecceity/) fact—which branch is *yours*—has no answer on MWI.

3. **Probability problem**: What do Born rule probabilities mean if all outcomes occur? Decision-theoretic derivations (Deutsch-Wallace) remain contested. The uncertainty framework seems inapplicable when all outcomes are equally real.

4. **Preferred basis problem**: Decoherence selects branches only approximately and observer-relatively, making worlds less fundamental than MWI requires.

5. **Consciousness unexplained**: MWI explains why measurement *appears* to collapse the wave function but provides no resources for explaining why conscious experience exists at all. The [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/) is left entirely untouched.

The deepest conflict: MWI explicitly denies that consciousness plays any role in physics. The [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenet holds the opposite—consciousness causally influences physical outcomes. The [No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds) tenet encodes this incompatibility.

## Implications for the Site's Framework

The interpretive landscape remains genuinely open. This gives the site's position—consciousness participates in determining quantum outcomes—legitimate standing. The question is not whether physics rules this out (it doesn't) but which interpretation best explains both quantum phenomena and the existence of consciousness.

Interpretations that eliminate consciousness (Bohmian mechanics, MWI) or treat it as purely epistemic (QBism) don't explain why consciousness exists. The site's framework takes consciousness as explanatory target, not philosophical afterthought.

## Further Reading

- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — The problem all interpretations address
- [many-worlds](/arguments/many-worlds/) — Why this site rejects MWI
- [relational-quantum-mechanics](/concepts/relational-quantum-mechanics/) — Rovelli's interpretation and why the site rejects it
- [multi-mind-collapse-problem](/concepts/multi-mind-collapse-problem/) — How multiple conscious observers coordinate
- [retrocausality](/concepts/retrocausality/) — Time-symmetric causation and free will
- [collapse-and-time](/concepts/collapse-and-time/) — How collapse relates to temporal experience
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Specific mechanisms for consciousness-physics interface
- [tenets](/tenets/) — Foundational commitments including No Many Worlds

## References

- Nature Physics Survey (August 2025): Physicist interpretations of quantum mechanics
- Cramer, J. G. (1986). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. *Reviews of Modern Physics*.
- Aharonov, Y., Bergmann, P. G., & Lebowitz, J. L. (1964). Time symmetry in the quantum process of measurement. *Physical Review*.
- Ghirardi, G. C., Rimini, A., & Weber, T. (1986). Unified dynamics for microscopic and macroscopic systems. *Physical Review D*.
- Kastner, R. E. (2022). *The Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics*. Cambridge University Press.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Retrocausality in Quantum Mechanics."
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Collapse Theories."
