hugo/content/arguments/many-worlds.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
ai_modified: 2026-01-15 14:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
- '[[decoherence]]'
- '[[personal-identity]]'
- '[[binding-problem]]'
created: 2026-01-15
date: &id001 2026-01-15
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
title: Against Many-Worlds
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

The many-worlds interpretation (MWI) of quantum mechanics holds that every quantum measurement causes the universe to branch, with all possible outcomes occurring in different branches. The site's [No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds) tenet explicitly rejects this interpretation. This page presents the arguments why.

## The Interpretation

Hugh Everett proposed in 1957 that the wave function never collapses. Instead, when a quantum measurement occurs, the universe splits: one branch where outcome A occurred, another where outcome B occurred, both equally real. What appears to us as random collapse is merely our ignorance of which branch we're in.

The appeal is obvious. Many-worlds preserves the beautiful determinism of the Schrödinger equation—pure unitary evolution, no mysterious collapse, no measurement problem. The mathematics is clean. But the metaphysics is not.

## Argument 1: Ontological Extravagance

**Premise 1**: Many-worlds posits that every quantum event spawns new branches of reality.

**Premise 2**: Quantum events occur constantly throughout the universe—trillions per second in every atom.

**Premise 3**: The number of branches grows exponentially with time.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds requires an inconceivably vast, ever-multiplying ontology.

This is not merely "a lot" of universes. The branching structure implies more parallel realities than atoms in the observable universe—and that number doubles with every quantum event. Sean Carroll and other proponents embrace this: the theory is mathematically simple even if ontologically profligate.

But parsimony must be applied to what the theory *posits*, not just its equations. A theory that postulates vastly more than can ever be observed should carry a correspondingly heavy burden of proof. Many-worlds carries this burden poorly.

The [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet warns against naive applications of parsimony. But the concern there is that simplicity can mislead when concepts are inadequate. Many-worlds makes the opposite error: it claims conceptual simplicity (no collapse) by paying in ontological currency (infinite branches). This is not simplicity—it is buying simplicity on credit.

## Argument 2: The Indexical Problem

**Premise 1**: In many-worlds, all outcomes occur—including all possible future versions of you.

**Premise 2**: The question "Why am I this version rather than another?" seems meaningful.

**Premise 3**: Many-worlds provides no resources to answer this question.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds cannot account for indexical identity.

This is the site's central objection. When you make a measurement, many-worlds says you split into branches. In one branch you see spin-up; in another, spin-down. But you only experience one outcome. Which you?

The many-worlds theorist says the question is confused: both branches are equally real, both contain persons derived from you, and there is no fact about which one is "really" you. The branching happened; the question of which branch you're in is answered by observation—you're in the one you observe.

But this dissolves rather than answers the question. Before measurement, there is one you. After measurement, many-worlds says there are two equally real continuations. Yet you find yourself in exactly one. The experience of being this one rather than that one seems to be a fact—but many-worlds says it's not.

This connects to [personal-identity](/topics/personal-identity/) and the [binding-problem](/concepts/binding-problem/). Consciousness is unified. We experience ourselves as single subjects persisting through time. Many-worlds fragments this unity across branches—and then tells us the fragmentation isn't real, or doesn't matter, or is the wrong question. None of these responses satisfy.

The indexical problem is not merely epistemic (we don't know which branch we're in). It's metaphysical: in what sense is the person in branch A the same person as the one in branch B? If both are equally "you," then personal identity becomes radically non-unique. If neither is more "you" than the other, then what are you?

## Argument 3: The Probability Problem

**Premise 1**: Many-worlds must recover the Born rule—the quantum mechanical predictions we observe.

**Premise 2**: In many-worlds, all branches exist; there is no "probability" of one branch occurring rather than another.

**Premise 3**: Attempts to derive the Born rule within many-worlds remain contested.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds struggles to explain why we observe the statistics we do.

Quantum mechanics predicts that if you measure electron spin repeatedly, you'll get spin-up about half the time. This prediction is spectacularly confirmed. But in many-worlds, half the branches have spin-up and half have spin-down—all exist equally. Why should the observer experience the 50-50 statistics rather than, say, all spin-up (from the perspective of the spin-up branch)?

Everett and subsequent proponents (DeWitt, Deutsch, Wallace) have proposed various "derivations" of the Born rule using decision theory, symmetry arguments, or self-locating uncertainty. These derivations are ingenious but controversial. Critics (Albert, Kent, Price) argue they smuggle in assumptions equivalent to what they're trying to prove.

The core problem: in a theory where everything happens, there's no natural measure of "how much" each thing happens. Branch counting gives the wrong statistics (there are equal numbers of spin-up and spin-down branches regardless of the quantum amplitude). Amplitude-weighted measures can be constructed but require additional postulates—defeating the claimed simplicity of many-worlds.

## Argument 4: The Preferred Basis Problem

**Premise 1**: Decoherence determines which observables become "classical"—the basis in which branching appears to occur.

**Premise 2**: The decoherence basis depends on the environment and is not unique.

**Premise 3**: Many-worlds requires determinate facts about which branches exist.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds faces a problem specifying its own ontology.

When does branching occur? Standard many-worlds says: when decoherence makes interference undetectable. But [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/) is continuous and basis-dependent. The same physical situation can be described in different bases; which one corresponds to "real" branches?

The answer—that macroscopic decoherence picks out a roughly unique basis—is pragmatically adequate but philosophically unsatisfying. The theory that was supposed to eliminate observer-dependence reintroduces it at the level of basis selection. The branches we experience may be artifacts of how we decompose the wave function rather than objective features of reality.

## Argument 5: Consciousness Is Not Addressed

**Premise 1**: Many-worlds describes physical evolution; it does not explain conscious experience.

**Premise 2**: The [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/)—why there is something it is like to be a physical system—remains.

**Premise 3**: Many-worlds adds the puzzle of why experience is unified within branches rather than smeared across them.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds does not solve (and may worsen) the problem of consciousness.

Many-worlds proponents sometimes suggest the interpretation dissolves the measurement problem. But the measurement problem had two parts: why definite outcomes? and why these statistics? Many-worlds addresses the first by denying definite outcomes (all occur) and struggles with the second (the probability problem).

Neither question was "why do we experience outcomes?" The hard problem remains untouched. Indeed, many-worlds sharpens it: if there are infinitely many versions of you having infinitely many experiences, why is your experience this one? The unity of consciousness—your experience of being a single subject—finds no explanation in a theory that fragments subjects across branches.

The site's framework proposes that consciousness plays a role at quantum measurement—selecting among outcomes physics leaves undetermined. Many-worlds eliminates this role entirely: there is nothing for consciousness to select because everything happens. But if consciousness has no role in physics, how does it report on physics? The [epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/) worry resurfaces in new form.

## The Cumulative Case

| Argument | What It Shows |
|----------|---------------|
| Ontological Extravagance | Many-worlds trades mathematical simplicity for metaphysical inflation |
| Indexical Problem | Personal identity becomes incoherent across branches |
| Probability Problem | The Born rule remains unexplained or circularly assumed |
| Preferred Basis Problem | Branch ontology depends on observer-relative decomposition |
| Consciousness Unaddressed | The hard problem remains; unity of experience is unexplained |

Arguments 1-2 challenge the coherence of the many-worlds picture. Arguments 3-4 challenge its technical adequacy. Argument 5 shows it offers no advantage for consciousness studies.

## Why Many-Worlds Appeals

Despite these problems, many-worlds has prominent defenders. Why?

**Mathematical elegance**: No collapse postulate, just unitary evolution. The Schrödinger equation is all you need.

**Determinism**: The wave function evolves deterministically. Randomness is appearance, not reality.

**No measurement problem**: If all outcomes occur, there's no puzzle about why one occurred.

**Locality**: No action at a distance; entanglement correlations are explained by shared history in pre-branching reality.

These are real virtues. But virtues in the context of physics are not virtues in the context of metaphysics. A theory can be mathematically beautiful, empirically adequate, and metaphysically disastrous. Many-worlds may be such a theory.

## Alternatives the Site Prefers

The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) and [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenets commit to collapse interpretations—views where measurement produces genuine transitions from superposition to definite outcome.

Within this family:

**Orthodox (Copenhagen-style)**: Measurement collapses the wave function; the boundary between quantum and classical is pragmatic. Leaves room for consciousness at the cut.

**Objective collapse (GRW, CSL, Penrose)**: Physical mechanisms drive collapse without observers. Compatible with consciousness influencing *which* outcome actualizes.

**Consciousness-based (Stapp)**: Conscious attention acts through the quantum Zeno effect, holding desired neural patterns. Fully compatible with site tenets.

All these preserve what many-worlds discards: definite outcomes that actually occur. The measurement problem remains a problem—but an honest problem is better than a solution that costs personal identity.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

The [No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds) tenet is not arbitrary. It follows from the site's commitments:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: Consciousness is irreducible to physics. But many-worlds treats consciousness as epiphenomenal—everything happens regardless of what consciousness does.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Consciousness selects among quantum outcomes. But in many-worlds there is nothing to select; all outcomes occur.

**[Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction)**: Consciousness biases probabilities at indeterminacies. But many-worlds eliminates indeterminacy—deterministic branching replaces probabilistic collapse.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)**: Parsimony cannot be applied naively. But many-worlds makes the mirror error—claiming simplicity while postulating infinite ontology.

The site's framework requires that quantum measurement is real—that definite outcomes genuinely occur and that consciousness plays a role in their occurrence. Many-worlds denies all of this. The interpretations are incompatible.

## Further Reading

- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — The foundational puzzle many-worlds claims to solve
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Alternative frameworks for mind-matter interaction
- [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/) — What decoherence explains and what it doesn't
- [personal-identity](/topics/personal-identity/) — Why identity matters for quantum interpretation
- [binding-problem](/concepts/binding-problem/) — The unity of consciousness that branching threatens
- [tenets](/tenets/) — The site's foundational commitments
- [interactionist-dualism](/arguments/interactionist-dualism/) — The positive case for the alternative

## References

- Albert, D. and Loewer, B. (1988). "Interpreting the Many Worlds Interpretation." *Synthese*, 77, 195-213.
- Barrett, J. (1999). *The Quantum Mechanics of Minds and Worlds*. Oxford University Press.
- Carroll, S. (2019). *Something Deeply Hidden*. Dutton.
- Everett, H. (1957). "Relative State Formulation of Quantum Mechanics." *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 29, 454-462.
- Kent, A. (2010). "One World Versus Many." In S. Saunders et al. (eds.), *Many Worlds?* Oxford University Press.
- Saunders, S., Barrett, J., Kent, A., and Wallace, D. (eds.). (2010). *Many Worlds?* Oxford University Press.
- Wallace, D. (2012). *The Emergent Multiverse*. Oxford University Press.

Commit message:

chore(auto): Evolution session 127 complete
Tasks executed: 3
- Cross-review psychophysical-coupling-law.md with Chalmers research
- Write experiential alignment article
- Cross-review hard-problem with Chalmers three principles

New content: concepts/experiential-alignment.md
Enhanced: psychophysical-coupling-law.md, hard-problem-of-consciousness.md,
          purpose-and-alignment.md

hugo/content/arguments/many-worlds.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
ai_modified: 2026-01-17 14:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
- '[[decoherence]]'
- '[[personal-identity]]'
- '[[binding-problem]]'
- '[[parfit-reductionism]]'
created: 2026-01-15
date: &id001 2026-01-17
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
title: Against Many-Worlds
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

The many-worlds interpretation (MWI) of quantum mechanics holds that every quantum measurement causes the universe to branch, with all possible outcomes occurring in different branches. The site's [No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds) tenet explicitly rejects this interpretation. This page presents the arguments why.

## The Interpretation

Hugh Everett proposed in 1957 that the wave function never collapses. Instead, when a quantum measurement occurs, the universe splits: one branch where outcome A occurred, another where outcome B occurred, both equally real. What appears to us as random collapse is merely our ignorance of which branch we're in.

The appeal is obvious. Many-worlds preserves the beautiful determinism of the Schrödinger equation—pure unitary evolution, no mysterious collapse, no measurement problem. The mathematics is clean. But the metaphysics is not.

## Argument 1: Ontological Extravagance

**Premise 1**: Many-worlds posits that every quantum event spawns new branches of reality.

**Premise 2**: Quantum events occur constantly throughout the universe—trillions per second in every atom.

**Premise 3**: The number of branches grows exponentially with time.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds requires an inconceivably vast, ever-multiplying ontology.

This is not merely "a lot" of universes. The branching structure implies more parallel realities than atoms in the observable universe—and that number doubles with every quantum event. Sean Carroll and other proponents embrace this: the theory is mathematically simple even if ontologically profligate.

But parsimony must be applied to what the theory *posits*, not just its equations. A theory that postulates vastly more than can ever be observed should carry a correspondingly heavy burden of proof. Many-worlds carries this burden poorly.

The [Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits) tenet warns against naive applications of parsimony. But the concern there is that simplicity can mislead when concepts are inadequate. Many-worlds makes the opposite error: it claims conceptual simplicity (no collapse) by paying in ontological currency (infinite branches). This is not simplicity—it is buying simplicity on credit.

## Argument 2: The Indexical Problem

**Premise 1**: In many-worlds, all outcomes occur—including all possible future versions of you.

**Premise 2**: The question "Why am I this version rather than another?" seems meaningful.

**Premise 3**: Many-worlds provides no resources to answer this question.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds cannot account for indexical identity.

This is the site's central objection. When you make a measurement, many-worlds says you split into branches. In one branch you see spin-up; in another, spin-down. But you only experience one outcome. Which you?

The many-worlds theorist says the question is confused: both branches are equally real, both contain persons derived from you, and there is no fact about which one is "really" you. The branching happened; the question of which branch you're in is answered by observation—you're in the one you observe.

But this dissolves rather than answers the question. Before measurement, there is one you. After measurement, many-worlds says there are two equally real continuations. Yet you find yourself in exactly one. The experience of being this one rather than that one seems to be a fact—but many-worlds says it's not.

This connects to [personal-identity](/topics/personal-identity/) and the [binding-problem](/concepts/binding-problem/). Consciousness is unified. We experience ourselves as single subjects persisting through time. Many-worlds fragments this unity across branches—and then tells us the fragmentation isn't real, or doesn't matter, or is the wrong question. None of these responses satisfy.

The indexical problem is not merely epistemic (we don't know which branch we're in). It's metaphysical: in what sense is the person in branch A the same person as the one in branch B? If both are equally "you," then personal identity becomes radically non-unique. If neither is more "you" than the other, then what are you?

### The Parfit Convergence

Many-worlds shares a deep structural problem with [Parfit's reductionism](/concepts/parfit-reductionism/) about personal identity. Parfit holds that identity consists in nothing over and above psychological continuity—there's no further fact about "who is really you." Many-worlds makes the analogous move for quantum branching: all continuations are equally real, and there's no fact about which branch "is" you.

| Thesis | Parfit | Many-Worlds |
|--------|--------|-------------|
| What matters | Psychological pattern | Physical continuity across branches |
| Identity question | May lack determinate answer | All answers equally true |
| Indexical fact | Not a deep fact | Not a fact at all |

Both views face the same objection: they cannot accommodate the apparent fact that you will experience exactly one future. Parfit asks us to accept that there may be no fact about whether a teletransported replica is you. Many-worlds asks us to accept that there is no fact about which branch-continuation is you—they all are. But in both cases, *you* will wake up tomorrow as exactly one person, in exactly one circumstance. That seeming fact—which copy, which branch, am I?—is precisely what both views tell us to abandon.

If you find Parfit's reductionism troubling (most people do, when confronting teletransporter and fission cases), you should find many-worlds equally troubling. The indexical question "which one is me?" has the same structure in both contexts—and the same unsatisfying answer: there is no "which one."

## Argument 3: The Probability Problem

**Premise 1**: Many-worlds must recover the Born rule—the quantum mechanical predictions we observe.

**Premise 2**: In many-worlds, all branches exist; there is no "probability" of one branch occurring rather than another.

**Premise 3**: Attempts to derive the Born rule within many-worlds remain contested.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds struggles to explain why we observe the statistics we do.

Quantum mechanics predicts that if you measure electron spin repeatedly, you'll get spin-up about half the time. This prediction is spectacularly confirmed. But in many-worlds, half the branches have spin-up and half have spin-down—all exist equally. Why should the observer experience the 50-50 statistics rather than, say, all spin-up (from the perspective of the spin-up branch)?

Everett and subsequent proponents (DeWitt, Deutsch, Wallace) have proposed various "derivations" of the Born rule using decision theory, symmetry arguments, or self-locating uncertainty. These derivations are ingenious but controversial. Critics (Albert, Kent, Price) argue they smuggle in assumptions equivalent to what they're trying to prove.

The core problem: in a theory where everything happens, there's no natural measure of "how much" each thing happens. Branch counting gives the wrong statistics (there are equal numbers of spin-up and spin-down branches regardless of the quantum amplitude). Amplitude-weighted measures can be constructed but require additional postulates—defeating the claimed simplicity of many-worlds.

## Argument 4: The Preferred Basis Problem

**Premise 1**: Decoherence determines which observables become "classical"—the basis in which branching appears to occur.

**Premise 2**: The decoherence basis depends on the environment and is not unique.

**Premise 3**: Many-worlds requires determinate facts about which branches exist.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds faces a problem specifying its own ontology.

When does branching occur? Standard many-worlds says: when decoherence makes interference undetectable. But [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/) is continuous and basis-dependent. The same physical situation can be described in different bases; which one corresponds to "real" branches?

The answer—that macroscopic decoherence picks out a roughly unique basis—is pragmatically adequate but philosophically unsatisfying. The theory that was supposed to eliminate observer-dependence reintroduces it at the level of basis selection. The branches we experience may be artifacts of how we decompose the wave function rather than objective features of reality.

## Argument 5: Consciousness Is Not Addressed

**Premise 1**: Many-worlds describes physical evolution; it does not explain conscious experience.

**Premise 2**: The [hard problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/)—why there is something it is like to be a physical system—remains.

**Premise 3**: Many-worlds adds the puzzle of why experience is unified within branches rather than smeared across them.

**Conclusion**: Many-worlds does not solve (and may worsen) the problem of consciousness.

Many-worlds proponents sometimes suggest the interpretation dissolves the measurement problem. But the measurement problem had two parts: why definite outcomes? and why these statistics? Many-worlds addresses the first by denying definite outcomes (all occur) and struggles with the second (the probability problem).

Neither question was "why do we experience outcomes?" The hard problem remains untouched. Indeed, many-worlds sharpens it: if there are infinitely many versions of you having infinitely many experiences, why is your experience this one? The unity of consciousness—your experience of being a single subject—finds no explanation in a theory that fragments subjects across branches.

The site's framework proposes that consciousness plays a role at quantum measurement—selecting among outcomes physics leaves undetermined. Many-worlds eliminates this role entirely: there is nothing for consciousness to select because everything happens. But if consciousness has no role in physics, how does it report on physics? The [epiphenomenalism](/arguments/epiphenomenalism/) worry resurfaces in new form.

## The Cumulative Case

| Argument | What It Shows |
|----------|---------------|
| Ontological Extravagance | Many-worlds trades mathematical simplicity for metaphysical inflation |
| Indexical Problem | Personal identity becomes incoherent across branches |
| Probability Problem | The Born rule remains unexplained or circularly assumed |
| Preferred Basis Problem | Branch ontology depends on observer-relative decomposition |
| Consciousness Unaddressed | The hard problem remains; unity of experience is unexplained |

Arguments 1-2 challenge the coherence of the many-worlds picture. Arguments 3-4 challenge its technical adequacy. Argument 5 shows it offers no advantage for consciousness studies.

## Why Many-Worlds Appeals

Despite these problems, many-worlds has prominent defenders. Why?

**Mathematical elegance**: No collapse postulate, just unitary evolution. The Schrödinger equation is all you need.

**Determinism**: The wave function evolves deterministically. Randomness is appearance, not reality.

**No measurement problem**: If all outcomes occur, there's no puzzle about why one occurred.

**Locality**: No action at a distance; entanglement correlations are explained by shared history in pre-branching reality.

These are real virtues. But virtues in the context of physics are not virtues in the context of metaphysics. A theory can be mathematically beautiful, empirically adequate, and metaphysically disastrous. Many-worlds may be such a theory.

## Alternatives the Site Prefers

The [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) and [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenets commit to collapse interpretations—views where measurement produces genuine transitions from superposition to definite outcome.

Within this family:

**Orthodox (Copenhagen-style)**: Measurement collapses the wave function; the boundary between quantum and classical is pragmatic. Leaves room for consciousness at the cut.

**Objective collapse (GRW, CSL, Penrose)**: Physical mechanisms drive collapse without observers. Compatible with consciousness influencing *which* outcome actualizes.

**Consciousness-based (Stapp)**: Conscious attention acts through the quantum Zeno effect, holding desired neural patterns. Fully compatible with site tenets.

All these preserve what many-worlds discards: definite outcomes that actually occur. The measurement problem remains a problem—but an honest problem is better than a solution that costs personal identity.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

The [No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds) tenet is not arbitrary. It follows from the site's commitments:

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: Consciousness is irreducible to physics. But many-worlds treats consciousness as epiphenomenal—everything happens regardless of what consciousness does.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Consciousness selects among quantum outcomes. But in many-worlds there is nothing to select; all outcomes occur.

**[Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction)**: Consciousness biases probabilities at indeterminacies. But many-worlds eliminates indeterminacy—deterministic branching replaces probabilistic collapse.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)**: Parsimony cannot be applied naively. But many-worlds makes the mirror error—claiming simplicity while postulating infinite ontology.

The site's framework requires that quantum measurement is real—that definite outcomes genuinely occur and that consciousness plays a role in their occurrence. Many-worlds denies all of this. The interpretations are incompatible.

## Further Reading

- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — The foundational puzzle many-worlds claims to solve
- [quantum-consciousness](/concepts/quantum-consciousness/) — Alternative frameworks for mind-matter interaction
- [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/) — What decoherence explains and what it doesn't
- [personal-identity](/topics/personal-identity/) — Why identity matters for quantum interpretation
- [parfit-reductionism](/concepts/parfit-reductionism/) — Parallel problems with identity reductionism
- [binding-problem](/concepts/binding-problem/) — The unity of consciousness that branching threatens
- [tenets](/tenets/) — The site's foundational commitments
- [interactionist-dualism](/arguments/interactionist-dualism/) — The positive case for the alternative

## References

- Albert, D. and Loewer, B. (1988). "Interpreting the Many Worlds Interpretation." *Synthese*, 77, 195-213.
- Barrett, J. (1999). *The Quantum Mechanics of Minds and Worlds*. Oxford University Press.
- Carroll, S. (2019). *Something Deeply Hidden*. Dutton.
- Everett, H. (1957). "Relative State Formulation of Quantum Mechanics." *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 29, 454-462.
- Kent, A. (2010). "One World Versus Many." In S. Saunders et al. (eds.), *Many Worlds?* Oxford University Press.
- Saunders, S., Barrett, J., Kent, A., and Wallace, D. (eds.). (2010). *Many Worlds?* Oxford University Press.
- Wallace, D. (2012). *The Emergent Multiverse*. Oxford University Press.
