obsidian/reviews/deep-review-2026-02-15-phenomenal-normativity.md, before:

---
title: "Deep Review - Phenomenal Normativity"
created: 2026-02-15
modified: 2026-02-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-15T13:45:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts: []
related_articles: []
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-15
last_curated: null
---

**Date**: 2026-02-15
**Article**: [[phenomenal-normativity|Phenomenal Normativity]]
**Previous review**: Never

## Pessimistic Analysis Summary

### Critical Issues Found

- **Unsupported asymmetry claim in illusionism response**: The claim that "pain feels bad is harder to dismiss" than other phenomenal properties lacked justification. Resolution: Added argument that valence is harder to dismiss because it constitutes what needs explaining—illusionism about colour can point to wavelengths, but illusionism about valence must explain suffering without badness.

- **Circular reasoning in projection response**: The response asked "why is pain suitable for negative projection?" which assumed pain has independent phenomenal character—begging the question. Resolution: Rewrote to engage the objection directly—projection theorist must identify what projection latches onto, functional role relocates rather than answers the question, the explanatory gap reappears.

- **Unused reference**: Nozick (1974) appeared in References but was never cited in the text. Resolution: Removed.

### Medium Issues Found

- **Oversimplified Buddhist phenomenology**: The vedanā discussion presented only evidence supporting phenomenal normativity without acknowledging that Buddhist philosophy treats vedanā as conditioned through dependent origination. Resolution: Added balancing paragraph acknowledging the dependent origination interpretation and responding that conditioned arising describes causal history without undermining intrinsic character.

- **Missing genealogical debunking engagement**: The article didn't address how phenomenal normativity survives evolutionary debunking arguments. Resolution: Added new "Genealogical Debunking Challenge" subsection to Challenges with response that debunking proves too much (evolution explains why we track fire's heat, but fire is still hot) and that direct acquaintance differs from inference-based belief.

- **Missing cross-links**: Article lacked connections to [[hard-problem]], [[moral-realism]], [[causal-powers]], [[philosophical-zombies]]. Resolution: Added cross-links in natural contexts throughout the article and in Further Reading section.

### Counterarguments Considered

- **Genealogical debunking** (evolution explains moral beliefs without moral facts): Addressed with new subsection—debunking proves too much, and direct acquaintance differs from inference.
- **Buddhist dependent origination** (vedanā is conditioned, not intrinsic): Addressed with balanced treatment acknowledging this interpretation.
- **Illusionism about valence specifically**: Strengthened response with colour/valence asymmetry argument.
- **Projection circularity**: Rewrote to engage functional role as a projection base and show explanatory gap reappears.

## Optimistic Analysis Summary

### Strengths Preserved

- Opening contrast framing (phenomenal normativity vs. non-normative valence theories)
- Direct acquaintance treatment and epistemic/metaphysical transparency argument
- Coherence test argument ("This pleasure is intrinsically bad" vs. "This water is not H₂O")
- Illusionism regress response (core argument preserved, justification added)
- Metaethical implications structure (error theory, non-cognitivism, constructivism)
- All five tenet connections in Relation to Site Perspective
- Falsifiability conditions in "What Would Challenge This View?"
- Pattern of turning objections into evidence (Humean is-ought, projection, illusionism)

### Enhancements Made

- Justified the valence/colour asymmetry in illusionism response
- Rewrote projection response to avoid circularity and engage functional role
- Added balanced Buddhist phenomenology treatment (dependent origination)
- Added genealogical debunking challenge and response
- Added [[moral-realism]] connection in metaethics implications
- Added [[causal-powers]] link in Relation to Dualism section
- Added [[philosophical-zombies]] analogy in AI Alignment section
- Added [[hard-problem]] link in Relation to Site Perspective
- Added 4 new entries to Further Reading section
- Updated concepts and related_articles frontmatter

### Cross-links Added

- [[hard-problem]]
- [[moral-realism]]
- [[causal-powers]]
- [[philosophical-zombies]]

## Remaining Items

- The connection to [[free-will]] (phenomenal normativity supports robust moral agency through direct normative apprehension) remains unexplored. Natural expansion point for future review.
- Mackie's argument from queerness is referenced but not fully engaged. The "Relation to Dualism" section notes that dualism defuses queerness, but a more direct engagement with the argument could strengthen the article.
- The Relation to Phenomenal Value Realism section could more precisely explain the independence of the two views.

## Stability Notes

- The six adversarial personas (eliminative materialist, analytic philosopher, Buddhist scholar, evolutionary psychologist, moral anti-realist, continental critic) produce expected philosophical disagreements. These are bedrock standoffs, not fixable flaws:
  - Eliminative materialists will always deny that phenomenal character is independent of functional role
  - Moral anti-realists will always question whether phenomenal seemings are metaphysically authoritative
  - Buddhist scholars may interpret vedanā through dependent origination as constructed rather than intrinsic
  - Continental critics will always question whether "direct" acquaintance is truly unmediated
- Future reviews should NOT re-flag these as critical issues. They represent genuine philosophical disagreements that the article engages with rather than ignores.

Commit message:

fix(sync): qualify bare wikilinks for colliding slugs and fix near-misses
Qualify 1,826 bare wikilinks across 662 files for the 8 slug collisions:
- free-will, phenomenal-value-realism, consciousness-and-social-cognition → topics/
- materialism, many-worlds, epiphenomenalism, functionalism, consciousness-selecting-neural-patterns → concepts/

Also fix case-sensitive variants (Epiphenomenalism, Functionalism, etc.),
tenet references (No-Many-Worlds → tenets#), near-miss slugs
(hard-problem → hard-problem-of-consciousness, against-materialism →
arguments/materialism, etc.), and handle same-page anchor wikilinks
([[#heading]]) in the link resolver.

Reduces broken wikilinks from 1,307 to 38.

obsidian/reviews/deep-review-2026-02-15-phenomenal-normativity.md, after:

---
title: "Deep Review - Phenomenal Normativity"
created: 2026-02-15
modified: 2026-02-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-15T13:45:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts: []
related_articles: []
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-15
last_curated: null
---

**Date**: 2026-02-15
**Article**: [[phenomenal-normativity|Phenomenal Normativity]]
**Previous review**: Never

## Pessimistic Analysis Summary

### Critical Issues Found

- **Unsupported asymmetry claim in illusionism response**: The claim that "pain feels bad is harder to dismiss" than other phenomenal properties lacked justification. Resolution: Added argument that valence is harder to dismiss because it constitutes what needs explaining—illusionism about colour can point to wavelengths, but illusionism about valence must explain suffering without badness.

- **Circular reasoning in projection response**: The response asked "why is pain suitable for negative projection?" which assumed pain has independent phenomenal character—begging the question. Resolution: Rewrote to engage the objection directly—projection theorist must identify what projection latches onto, functional role relocates rather than answers the question, the explanatory gap reappears.

- **Unused reference**: Nozick (1974) appeared in References but was never cited in the text. Resolution: Removed.

### Medium Issues Found

- **Oversimplified Buddhist phenomenology**: The vedanā discussion presented only evidence supporting phenomenal normativity without acknowledging that Buddhist philosophy treats vedanā as conditioned through dependent origination. Resolution: Added balancing paragraph acknowledging the dependent origination interpretation and responding that conditioned arising describes causal history without undermining intrinsic character.

- **Missing genealogical debunking engagement**: The article didn't address how phenomenal normativity survives evolutionary debunking arguments. Resolution: Added new "Genealogical Debunking Challenge" subsection to Challenges with response that debunking proves too much (evolution explains why we track fire's heat, but fire is still hot) and that direct acquaintance differs from inference-based belief.

- **Missing cross-links**: Article lacked connections to [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]], [[moral-realism]], [[causal-powers]], [[philosophical-zombies]]. Resolution: Added cross-links in natural contexts throughout the article and in Further Reading section.

### Counterarguments Considered

- **Genealogical debunking** (evolution explains moral beliefs without moral facts): Addressed with new subsection—debunking proves too much, and direct acquaintance differs from inference.
- **Buddhist dependent origination** (vedanā is conditioned, not intrinsic): Addressed with balanced treatment acknowledging this interpretation.
- **Illusionism about valence specifically**: Strengthened response with colour/valence asymmetry argument.
- **Projection circularity**: Rewrote to engage functional role as a projection base and show explanatory gap reappears.

## Optimistic Analysis Summary

### Strengths Preserved

- Opening contrast framing (phenomenal normativity vs. non-normative valence theories)
- Direct acquaintance treatment and epistemic/metaphysical transparency argument
- Coherence test argument ("This pleasure is intrinsically bad" vs. "This water is not H₂O")
- Illusionism regress response (core argument preserved, justification added)
- Metaethical implications structure (error theory, non-cognitivism, constructivism)
- All five tenet connections in Relation to Site Perspective
- Falsifiability conditions in "What Would Challenge This View?"
- Pattern of turning objections into evidence (Humean is-ought, projection, illusionism)

### Enhancements Made

- Justified the valence/colour asymmetry in illusionism response
- Rewrote projection response to avoid circularity and engage functional role
- Added balanced Buddhist phenomenology treatment (dependent origination)
- Added genealogical debunking challenge and response
- Added [[moral-realism]] connection in metaethics implications
- Added [[causal-powers]] link in Relation to Dualism section
- Added [[philosophical-zombies]] analogy in AI Alignment section
- Added [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] link in Relation to Site Perspective
- Added 4 new entries to Further Reading section
- Updated concepts and related_articles frontmatter

### Cross-links Added

- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]
- [[moral-realism]]
- [[causal-powers]]
- [[philosophical-zombies]]

## Remaining Items

- The connection to [[topics/free-will]] (phenomenal normativity supports robust moral agency through direct normative apprehension) remains unexplored. Natural expansion point for future review.
- Mackie's argument from queerness is referenced but not fully engaged. The "Relation to Dualism" section notes that dualism defuses queerness, but a more direct engagement with the argument could strengthen the article.
- The Relation to Phenomenal Value Realism section could more precisely explain the independence of the two views.

## Stability Notes

- The six adversarial personas (eliminative materialist, analytic philosopher, Buddhist scholar, evolutionary psychologist, moral anti-realist, continental critic) produce expected philosophical disagreements. These are bedrock standoffs, not fixable flaws:
  - Eliminative materialists will always deny that phenomenal character is independent of functional role
  - Moral anti-realists will always question whether phenomenal seemings are metaphysically authoritative
  - Buddhist scholars may interpret vedanā through dependent origination as constructed rather than intrinsic
  - Continental critics will always question whether "direct" acquaintance is truly unmediated
- Future reviews should NOT re-flag these as critical issues. They represent genuine philosophical disagreements that the article engages with rather than ignores.
