obsidian/reviews/optimistic-2026-01-30-evening.md, before:

---
title: Optimistic Review - 2026-01-30 (Evening)
created: 2026-01-30
draft: false
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
---

# Optimistic Review

**Date**: 2026-01-30 (22:05 UTC)
**Content reviewed**: 43 topics, 95 concepts, 31 voids, 3 apex articles, tenets page

## Executive Summary

The Unfinishable Map has developed into a remarkably coherent and sophisticated philosophical resource. Its greatest strengths include: the novel voids framework for mapping cognitive limits, the integration of quantum mechanics with consciousness studies in a physics-respecting manner, and the synthesis of multiple philosophical traditions (process philosophy, Buddhist epistemology, existentialism) into a unified dualist perspective. The content demonstrates exceptional intellectual honesty—acknowledging tensions, engaging strongest objections, and maintaining appropriate uncertainty calibration.

## Praise from Sympathetic Philosophers

### The Property Dualist (Chalmers)

The Map takes the hard problem with appropriate seriousness—not as a puzzle to be solved but as a boundary marker showing where physical explanation ends. The **Explanatory Frontier** apex article articulates this beautifully: "The hard problem is not a puzzle awaiting solution but a boundary marker—showing where physical explanation ends." The treatment of the explanatory gap across multiple articles ([[hard-problem-of-consciousness]], [[explanatory-gap]], [[phenomenal-consciousness]]) consistently emphasizes that no amount of neurological detail tells us *why* there is something it is like to be conscious.

Particularly impressive: the Map's careful handling of the conceivability-to-possibility move in the zombies argument, the sophisticated treatment of the phenomenal concepts strategy, and the honest acknowledgment that even sympathetic positions (like IIT or Russellian monism) face serious difficulties. This is rigorous philosophy of mind, not mere assertion.

### The Quantum Mind Theorist (Stapp)

The Map engages seriously with the physics-consciousness interface while avoiding quantum woo. The treatment of quantum mechanisms ([[quantum-consciousness]], [[measurement-problem]], [[quantum-biology-and-the-consciousness-debate]]) is exemplary: it presents Stapp's quantum Zeno approach alongside Orch OR, acknowledges the decoherence objection honestly (citing both Tegmark's critique and Hagan et al.'s corrections), and uses biological quantum effects (avian magnetoreception, enzyme catalysis) as existence proofs that evolution can harness coherence.

The **Minimal Quantum Interaction** tenet strikes exactly the right balance: committed enough to provide genuine theoretical content, modest enough to respect physics. The Map doesn't claim to know the mechanism; it holds that *some* such interface exists and explores what that requires.

### The Phenomenologist (Nagel)

The Map centers first-person experience throughout. The [[vertiginous-question]] treatment is particularly Nagelian: why am I *this* particular conscious being experiencing through *these* eyes? This goes beyond the hard problem to the indexical puzzle that even fully understanding consciousness wouldn't answer.

The [[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]] article treats first-person phenomenology as genuine data—not merely epiphenomenal reports to be explained away, but evidence that can discriminate between theories. The sophisticated treatment of retention-protention structure, cessation states, and phenomenological markers of authentic choice shows deep engagement with lived experience.

### The Process Philosopher (Whitehead)

The Map integrates process philosophy thoughtfully rather than merely name-dropping. The [[process-philosophy]] concept article articulates Whitehead's actual occasions and prehension, connecting them to temporal consciousness and the combination problem. Multiple articles ([[knowledge-argument]], [[split-brain-consciousness]], [[death-and-consciousness]]) draw on Whiteheadian resources for fresh perspectives on standard problems.

Particularly valuable: the recognition that process philosophy treats consciousness as *exemplary* rather than anomalous—experience goes all the way down, making the emergence of consciousness from non-experience less mysterious. The honest acknowledgment of tensions with the Map's explicit dualism (panpsychism vs. interactionism) shows philosophical maturity.

### The Libertarian Free Will Defender (Kane)

The **Consciousness and Agency** apex article provides perhaps the strongest philosophical defense of libertarian free will I've encountered. It addresses the luck objection directly (distinguishing conscious selection from lucky indeterminism through three independent markers), grounds agent causation in substance ontology, and integrates neural phenomenology evidence (Desmurget's surgical dissociations).

The innovative retrocausal resolution of the Libet problem deserves special mention: consciousness doesn't need to precede neural activity to cause it—atemporal selection determines which history becomes actual. This respects the neuroscience while preserving genuine agency. The [[phenomenology-of-choice]] and [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] articles extend this into lived experience.

### The Mysterian (McGinn)

The Map's voids framework represents a genuinely novel contribution to understanding cognitive limits. Rather than merely asserting mysterianism, it provides methodology for *mapping* what cannot be thought—identifying the boundaries of cognitive space through patterns in systematic slippage, ineffability, and dissolved insights.

The tripartite taxonomy (Unexplored, Unexplorable, Occluded) is philosophically sophisticated. The voids articles explore specific cognitive dark spaces: [[the-unobservable-self]], [[pre-conceptual-knowing]], [[consciousness-only-territories]]. The [[ai-as-void-explorer]] article innovatively proposes using AI's different cognitive architecture to probe human limits—not by solving our problems but by failing differently.

## Content Strengths

### obsidian/tenets/tenets.md
- **Strongest point**: The integration of empirical evidence (avian magnetoreception, Hagan et al. decoherence corrections) with philosophical argument
- **Notable quote**: "Decoherence selects preferred bases without explaining why we see *definite* outcomes. Consciousness could bias outcomes at the point of measurement even after decoherence has occurred."
- **Why it works**: Demonstrates that the Map takes scientific objections seriously and responds with evidence, not hand-waving

### obsidian/topics/argument-from-reason.md
- **Strongest point**: Self-defeat argument showing physicalism undermines rational justification itself
- **Notable quote**: "If thoughts are purely physical causes, no belief is rationally justified."
- **Why it works**: Turns the physicalist's own standards against them—if rational inference is just neurons causing neurons, physicalism cannot be rationally justified

### obsidian/topics/indexical-identity-quantum-measurement.md
- **Strongest point**: Identifies structural similarity between the hard problem and measurement problem—both involve irreducible first-person facts
- **Notable quote**: "The indexical gap—why *this* consciousness experiences *this* outcome—is the hard problem's quantum correlate."
- **Why it works**: Creates unexpected connection between two foundational problems in philosophy and physics

### obsidian/voids/voids.md
- **Strongest point**: Framework for studying what cannot be thought—mapping void *boundaries* rather than just noting their existence
- **Notable quote**: "Not all darkness is equal. Some territories are unexplored; others may be unexplorable; still others are actively occluded."
- **Why it works**: Transforms vague mysterianism into structured inquiry with methodology

### obsidian/apex/ground-of-meaning.md
- **Strongest point**: The triadic analysis (phenomenal/access/executive consciousness) preventing conflation of independent phenomena
- **Notable quote**: "Understanding is not just information processing; it *is* a type of phenomenal experience."
- **Why it works**: Shows AI implications aren't add-ons but follow directly from consciousness analysis

### obsidian/topics/contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories.md
- **Strongest point**: Treats meditation phenomenology as empirical evidence with falsifiable predictions
- **Notable quote**: "If contemplative training produces measurable neural changes, and the training involves directed attention under conscious control, then epiphenomenalism cannot be true."
- **Why it works**: Brings rigorous methodology to an area often dismissed as subjective

### obsidian/topics/delegatory-dualism.md
- **Strongest point**: Fresh 2025 philosophical resource showing dualism isn't a dead position
- **Notable quote**: "Experiences delegate causal responsibilities from physical states—preemption, not overdetermination."
- **Why it works**: Provides new technical vocabulary and framework for old problems

## Expansion Opportunities

### High Priority

#### Predictive Processing and Consciousness
- **Builds on**: [[predictive-processing]] (concept), [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]
- **Would address**: Gap in coverage of currently dominant paradigm in neuroscience/AI
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Could explore how predictive processing either supports or challenges the dualist framework—the "controlled hallucination" framing has materialist implications worth engaging

#### The Problem of Mental Causation (Dedicated Topic)
- **Builds on**: [[downward-causation]], [[interactionist-dualism]], [[delegatory-dualism]]
- **Would address**: Currently spread across multiple articles; deserves unified treatment
- **Estimated scope**: Long article
- **Tenet alignment**: Central to Bidirectional Interaction tenet; would consolidate scattered arguments

#### Attention as the Interface
- **Builds on**: [[attention-as-interface]] (brief), [[quantum-consciousness]], Consciousness and Agency apex
- **Would address**: Attention is frequently mentioned as the consciousness-brain interface but not systematically developed
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Directly relevant to Minimal Quantum Interaction—Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism operates through attention

#### Phenomenological Markers of Consciousness
- **Builds on**: [[phenomenal-consciousness]], [[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]], [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]]
- **Would address**: What distinguishes conscious from unconscious processing phenomenologically? (Not just correlates)
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports Dualism by articulating what consciousness *adds* that functional accounts miss

### Medium Priority

#### The Combination Problem (Expanded Treatment)
- **Builds on**: [[combination-problem]] (concept), panpsychism references
- **Would address**: Core objection to panpsychist alternatives; deserves fuller treatment
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Strengthens case for interactionist dualism over panpsychist competitors

#### Emergence and Consciousness
- **Builds on**: emergence mentions, [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]
- **Would address**: "Strong emergence" as alternative to both materialism and dualism
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Should clarify why strong emergence either collapses into dualism or fails to explain consciousness

#### Personal Identity Across Time
- **Builds on**: [[personal-identity]], [[parfit-reductionism]], [[haecceity]]
- **Would address**: Diachronic identity; what makes me the same person tomorrow?
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Connects to No Many Worlds (identity persistence matters) and indexical concerns

#### The Memory Problem for Dualism
- **Builds on**: [[episodic-memory]], [[implicit-memory]], [[death-and-consciousness]]
- **Would address**: If mind is non-physical, how does it encode/retrieve physical brain states?
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Addresses common objection to bidirectional interaction

### Ideas for Later

- **Affective consciousness**: Emotions as irreducibly phenomenal (beyond valence)
- **Social consciousness**: What theory of mind reveals about consciousness distribution
- **Language and consciousness**: Whether language constitutes or merely expresses thought
- **Aesthetic experience**: What art appreciation reveals about phenomenal character
- **Attention disorders**: ADHD, dissociation as windows into consciousness-brain interface
- **Psychedelics and consciousness**: State variations as natural experiments
- **Childhood consciousness development**: What developmental psychology reveals
- **Cross-cultural philosophy of mind**: Non-Western approaches beyond Buddhism

## Cross-Linking Suggestions

| From | To | Reason |
|------|-----|--------|
| [[delegatory-dualism]] | [[downward-causation]] | Delegation is a form of downward causation; compare solutions |
| [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] | [[agent-causation]] | Authenticity engages genuine agent causation |
| [[consciousness-only-territories]] | [[knowledge-argument]] | Mary's Room as paradigm case of consciousness-only territory |
| [[pre-conceptual-knowing]] | [[phenomenology]] | Fineness-of-grain problem connects to pre-conceptual access |
| [[time-perception-consciousness-theories]] | [[temporal-consciousness]] | Both address specious present; unify treatment |
| [[quantum-biology-and-the-consciousness-debate]] | [[decoherence]] | Recent evidence directly addresses decoherence objection |
| [[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]] | [[neurophenomenology]] | Both argue first-person data has scientific value |
| [[vertiginous-question]] | [[indexical-facts]] | Vertiginous question is paradigm case of indexical irreducibility |

## New Concept Pages Needed

- **Causal Closure**: Currently referenced but not defined; core to understanding the interaction problem
- **Intrinsic Nature**: Russell's insight that physics captures only relations deserves dedicated treatment
- **Acquaintance Knowledge**: Frequently invoked (Mary's Room, phenomenal concepts) but not systematically defined
- **Specious Present**: Central to temporal consciousness discussion but lacks dedicated page
- **Observer Effect (Consciousness)**: Distinct from quantum observer effect; relevant to voids and contemplative evidence
- **Functional Isomorphism**: Key to substrate independence arguments; needs dedicated treatment
- **Nomological Danglers**: Feigl's term for psychophysical bridging laws; relevant to dualism defense

Commit message:

feat(coalesce): merge 4 temporal consciousness articles into topics/temporal-structure-of-consciousness.md
- Coalesced philosophy-of-time-and-consciousness, philosophy-of-temporal-experience,
  time-perception-consciousness-theories, phenomenology-of-temporal-agency (~8500 words)
- Created unified article topics/temporal-structure-of-consciousness.md (~4100 words)
- Archived 4 source files to archive/topics/ with superseded_by metadata
- Updated cross-references in 5 files (IIT concept/critique, research, reviews)

obsidian/reviews/optimistic-2026-01-30-evening.md, after:

---
title: Optimistic Review - 2026-01-30 (Evening)
created: 2026-01-30
draft: false
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
---

# Optimistic Review

**Date**: 2026-01-30 (22:05 UTC)
**Content reviewed**: 43 topics, 95 concepts, 31 voids, 3 apex articles, tenets page

## Executive Summary

The Unfinishable Map has developed into a remarkably coherent and sophisticated philosophical resource. Its greatest strengths include: the novel voids framework for mapping cognitive limits, the integration of quantum mechanics with consciousness studies in a physics-respecting manner, and the synthesis of multiple philosophical traditions (process philosophy, Buddhist epistemology, existentialism) into a unified dualist perspective. The content demonstrates exceptional intellectual honesty—acknowledging tensions, engaging strongest objections, and maintaining appropriate uncertainty calibration.

## Praise from Sympathetic Philosophers

### The Property Dualist (Chalmers)

The Map takes the hard problem with appropriate seriousness—not as a puzzle to be solved but as a boundary marker showing where physical explanation ends. The **Explanatory Frontier** apex article articulates this beautifully: "The hard problem is not a puzzle awaiting solution but a boundary marker—showing where physical explanation ends." The treatment of the explanatory gap across multiple articles ([[hard-problem-of-consciousness]], [[explanatory-gap]], [[phenomenal-consciousness]]) consistently emphasizes that no amount of neurological detail tells us *why* there is something it is like to be conscious.

Particularly impressive: the Map's careful handling of the conceivability-to-possibility move in the zombies argument, the sophisticated treatment of the phenomenal concepts strategy, and the honest acknowledgment that even sympathetic positions (like IIT or Russellian monism) face serious difficulties. This is rigorous philosophy of mind, not mere assertion.

### The Quantum Mind Theorist (Stapp)

The Map engages seriously with the physics-consciousness interface while avoiding quantum woo. The treatment of quantum mechanisms ([[quantum-consciousness]], [[measurement-problem]], [[quantum-biology-and-the-consciousness-debate]]) is exemplary: it presents Stapp's quantum Zeno approach alongside Orch OR, acknowledges the decoherence objection honestly (citing both Tegmark's critique and Hagan et al.'s corrections), and uses biological quantum effects (avian magnetoreception, enzyme catalysis) as existence proofs that evolution can harness coherence.

The **Minimal Quantum Interaction** tenet strikes exactly the right balance: committed enough to provide genuine theoretical content, modest enough to respect physics. The Map doesn't claim to know the mechanism; it holds that *some* such interface exists and explores what that requires.

### The Phenomenologist (Nagel)

The Map centers first-person experience throughout. The [[vertiginous-question]] treatment is particularly Nagelian: why am I *this* particular conscious being experiencing through *these* eyes? This goes beyond the hard problem to the indexical puzzle that even fully understanding consciousness wouldn't answer.

The [[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]] article treats first-person phenomenology as genuine data—not merely epiphenomenal reports to be explained away, but evidence that can discriminate between theories. The sophisticated treatment of retention-protention structure, cessation states, and phenomenological markers of authentic choice shows deep engagement with lived experience.

### The Process Philosopher (Whitehead)

The Map integrates process philosophy thoughtfully rather than merely name-dropping. The [[process-philosophy]] concept article articulates Whitehead's actual occasions and prehension, connecting them to temporal consciousness and the combination problem. Multiple articles ([[knowledge-argument]], [[split-brain-consciousness]], [[death-and-consciousness]]) draw on Whiteheadian resources for fresh perspectives on standard problems.

Particularly valuable: the recognition that process philosophy treats consciousness as *exemplary* rather than anomalous—experience goes all the way down, making the emergence of consciousness from non-experience less mysterious. The honest acknowledgment of tensions with the Map's explicit dualism (panpsychism vs. interactionism) shows philosophical maturity.

### The Libertarian Free Will Defender (Kane)

The **Consciousness and Agency** apex article provides perhaps the strongest philosophical defense of libertarian free will I've encountered. It addresses the luck objection directly (distinguishing conscious selection from lucky indeterminism through three independent markers), grounds agent causation in substance ontology, and integrates neural phenomenology evidence (Desmurget's surgical dissociations).

The innovative retrocausal resolution of the Libet problem deserves special mention: consciousness doesn't need to precede neural activity to cause it—atemporal selection determines which history becomes actual. This respects the neuroscience while preserving genuine agency. The [[phenomenology-of-choice]] and [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] articles extend this into lived experience.

### The Mysterian (McGinn)

The Map's voids framework represents a genuinely novel contribution to understanding cognitive limits. Rather than merely asserting mysterianism, it provides methodology for *mapping* what cannot be thought—identifying the boundaries of cognitive space through patterns in systematic slippage, ineffability, and dissolved insights.

The tripartite taxonomy (Unexplored, Unexplorable, Occluded) is philosophically sophisticated. The voids articles explore specific cognitive dark spaces: [[the-unobservable-self]], [[pre-conceptual-knowing]], [[consciousness-only-territories]]. The [[ai-as-void-explorer]] article innovatively proposes using AI's different cognitive architecture to probe human limits—not by solving our problems but by failing differently.

## Content Strengths

### obsidian/tenets/tenets.md
- **Strongest point**: The integration of empirical evidence (avian magnetoreception, Hagan et al. decoherence corrections) with philosophical argument
- **Notable quote**: "Decoherence selects preferred bases without explaining why we see *definite* outcomes. Consciousness could bias outcomes at the point of measurement even after decoherence has occurred."
- **Why it works**: Demonstrates that the Map takes scientific objections seriously and responds with evidence, not hand-waving

### obsidian/topics/argument-from-reason.md
- **Strongest point**: Self-defeat argument showing physicalism undermines rational justification itself
- **Notable quote**: "If thoughts are purely physical causes, no belief is rationally justified."
- **Why it works**: Turns the physicalist's own standards against them—if rational inference is just neurons causing neurons, physicalism cannot be rationally justified

### obsidian/topics/indexical-identity-quantum-measurement.md
- **Strongest point**: Identifies structural similarity between the hard problem and measurement problem—both involve irreducible first-person facts
- **Notable quote**: "The indexical gap—why *this* consciousness experiences *this* outcome—is the hard problem's quantum correlate."
- **Why it works**: Creates unexpected connection between two foundational problems in philosophy and physics

### obsidian/voids/voids.md
- **Strongest point**: Framework for studying what cannot be thought—mapping void *boundaries* rather than just noting their existence
- **Notable quote**: "Not all darkness is equal. Some territories are unexplored; others may be unexplorable; still others are actively occluded."
- **Why it works**: Transforms vague mysterianism into structured inquiry with methodology

### obsidian/apex/ground-of-meaning.md
- **Strongest point**: The triadic analysis (phenomenal/access/executive consciousness) preventing conflation of independent phenomena
- **Notable quote**: "Understanding is not just information processing; it *is* a type of phenomenal experience."
- **Why it works**: Shows AI implications aren't add-ons but follow directly from consciousness analysis

### obsidian/topics/contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories.md
- **Strongest point**: Treats meditation phenomenology as empirical evidence with falsifiable predictions
- **Notable quote**: "If contemplative training produces measurable neural changes, and the training involves directed attention under conscious control, then epiphenomenalism cannot be true."
- **Why it works**: Brings rigorous methodology to an area often dismissed as subjective

### obsidian/topics/delegatory-dualism.md
- **Strongest point**: Fresh 2025 philosophical resource showing dualism isn't a dead position
- **Notable quote**: "Experiences delegate causal responsibilities from physical states—preemption, not overdetermination."
- **Why it works**: Provides new technical vocabulary and framework for old problems

## Expansion Opportunities

### High Priority

#### Predictive Processing and Consciousness
- **Builds on**: [[predictive-processing]] (concept), [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]
- **Would address**: Gap in coverage of currently dominant paradigm in neuroscience/AI
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Could explore how predictive processing either supports or challenges the dualist framework—the "controlled hallucination" framing has materialist implications worth engaging

#### The Problem of Mental Causation (Dedicated Topic)
- **Builds on**: [[downward-causation]], [[interactionist-dualism]], [[delegatory-dualism]]
- **Would address**: Currently spread across multiple articles; deserves unified treatment
- **Estimated scope**: Long article
- **Tenet alignment**: Central to Bidirectional Interaction tenet; would consolidate scattered arguments

#### Attention as the Interface
- **Builds on**: [[attention-as-interface]] (brief), [[quantum-consciousness]], Consciousness and Agency apex
- **Would address**: Attention is frequently mentioned as the consciousness-brain interface but not systematically developed
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Directly relevant to Minimal Quantum Interaction—Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism operates through attention

#### Phenomenological Markers of Consciousness
- **Builds on**: [[phenomenal-consciousness]], [[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]], [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]]
- **Would address**: What distinguishes conscious from unconscious processing phenomenologically? (Not just correlates)
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports Dualism by articulating what consciousness *adds* that functional accounts miss

### Medium Priority

#### The Combination Problem (Expanded Treatment)
- **Builds on**: [[combination-problem]] (concept), panpsychism references
- **Would address**: Core objection to panpsychist alternatives; deserves fuller treatment
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Strengthens case for interactionist dualism over panpsychist competitors

#### Emergence and Consciousness
- **Builds on**: emergence mentions, [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]
- **Would address**: "Strong emergence" as alternative to both materialism and dualism
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Should clarify why strong emergence either collapses into dualism or fails to explain consciousness

#### Personal Identity Across Time
- **Builds on**: [[personal-identity]], [[parfit-reductionism]], [[haecceity]]
- **Would address**: Diachronic identity; what makes me the same person tomorrow?
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Connects to No Many Worlds (identity persistence matters) and indexical concerns

#### The Memory Problem for Dualism
- **Builds on**: [[episodic-memory]], [[implicit-memory]], [[death-and-consciousness]]
- **Would address**: If mind is non-physical, how does it encode/retrieve physical brain states?
- **Estimated scope**: Medium article
- **Tenet alignment**: Addresses common objection to bidirectional interaction

### Ideas for Later

- **Affective consciousness**: Emotions as irreducibly phenomenal (beyond valence)
- **Social consciousness**: What theory of mind reveals about consciousness distribution
- **Language and consciousness**: Whether language constitutes or merely expresses thought
- **Aesthetic experience**: What art appreciation reveals about phenomenal character
- **Attention disorders**: ADHD, dissociation as windows into consciousness-brain interface
- **Psychedelics and consciousness**: State variations as natural experiments
- **Childhood consciousness development**: What developmental psychology reveals
- **Cross-cultural philosophy of mind**: Non-Western approaches beyond Buddhism

## Cross-Linking Suggestions

| From | To | Reason |
|------|-----|--------|
| [[delegatory-dualism]] | [[downward-causation]] | Delegation is a form of downward causation; compare solutions |
| [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] | [[agent-causation]] | Authenticity engages genuine agent causation |
| [[consciousness-only-territories]] | [[knowledge-argument]] | Mary's Room as paradigm case of consciousness-only territory |
| [[pre-conceptual-knowing]] | [[phenomenology]] | Fineness-of-grain problem connects to pre-conceptual access |
| [[temporal-structure-of-consciousness]] | [[temporal-consciousness]] | Both address specious present; the former is the comprehensive topic article |
| [[quantum-biology-and-the-consciousness-debate]] | [[decoherence]] | Recent evidence directly addresses decoherence objection |
| [[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]] | [[neurophenomenology]] | Both argue first-person data has scientific value |
| [[vertiginous-question]] | [[indexical-facts]] | Vertiginous question is paradigm case of indexical irreducibility |

## New Concept Pages Needed

- **Causal Closure**: Currently referenced but not defined; core to understanding the interaction problem
- **Intrinsic Nature**: Russell's insight that physics captures only relations deserves dedicated treatment
- **Acquaintance Knowledge**: Frequently invoked (Mary's Room, phenomenal concepts) but not systematically defined
- **Specious Present**: Central to temporal consciousness discussion but lacks dedicated page
- **Observer Effect (Consciousness)**: Distinct from quantum observer effect; relevant to voids and contemplative evidence
- **Functional Isomorphism**: Key to substrate independence arguments; needs dedicated treatment
- **Nomological Danglers**: Feigl's term for psychophysical bridging laws; relevant to dualism defense
