obsidian/reviews/tenet-check-2026-01-13.md, before:

---
title: Tenet Alignment Check - 2026-01-13
created: 2026-01-13
draft: false
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
---

# Tenet Alignment Check

**Date**: 2026-01-13
**Files checked**: 19 (7 topics, 12 concepts)
**Errors**: 0
**Warnings**: 0
**Notes**: 2

## Summary

All site content aligns well with the five foundational tenets. No direct contradictions or implicit conflicts were found. Two notes identify opportunities for clarification, not problems.

The content effectively:
- Presents the site's dualist, interactionist framework consistently
- Distinguishes the site's view from competing positions (functionalism, epiphenomenalism, panpsychism, idealism)
- Avoids quantum mysticism while taking quantum consciousness seriously
- Handles tensions productively (e.g., Buddhism's no-self vs. site's dualism)

## Errors

None.

## Warnings

None.

## Notes

### eastern-philosophy-consciousness.md
- **Tenet**: Dualism
- **Issue**: The article acknowledges tension between Buddhism's no-self (anattā) and dualism, which might concern readers expecting strict alignment.
- **Quote**: "Buddhism's no-self (anattā) doctrine... denies any permanent, substantial self. But how much does this conflict actually amount to?"
- **Assessment**: The article handles this productively, distinguishing permanent substance from moment-to-moment irreducibility. The tension is acknowledged and explored rather than hidden. No change needed, but future content could further develop how property dualism accommodates impermanence.

### integrated-information-theory.md
- **Tenet**: Bidirectional Interaction
- **Issue**: IIT is presented sympathetically despite conflicting with the bidirectional interaction tenet.
- **Quote**: "IIT has no room for this [bidirectional interaction]. If consciousness *is* integrated information, it doesn't *do* anything to the physical."
- **Assessment**: The article correctly identifies the conflict and explains why the site's framework differs. IIT is presented as a "sophisticated competitor" worth engaging, not as a view the site endorses. This is appropriate intellectual engagement, not a tenet violation.

## Files Passing All Checks

### Topics
- ai-consciousness.md ✓
- eastern-philosophy-consciousness.md ✓ (note above)
- free-will.md ✓
- hard-problem-of-consciousness.md ✓
- meaning-of-life.md ✓
- personal-identity.md ✓
- purpose-and-alignment.md ✓

### Concepts
- epiphenomenalism.md ✓
- existentialism.md ✓
- functionalism.md ✓
- idealism.md ✓
- integrated-information-theory.md ✓ (note above)
- locality.md ✓
- nihilism.md ✓
- panpsychism.md ✓
- qualia.md ✓
- quantum-consciousness.md ✓
- retrocausality.md ✓
- simulation.md ✓

## Highlights

**Strongest alignment**: The epiphenomenalism.md and functionalism.md articles explicitly engage rival views and explain the site's rejection clearly.

**Best handling of tension**: The eastern-philosophy-consciousness.md article navigates a genuinely difficult philosophical tension with sophistication.

**Most thorough tenet integration**: The free-will.md article connects all four relevant tenets (Dualism, Bidirectional Interaction, Minimal Quantum Interaction, No Many Worlds) into a coherent framework.

## Recommendations

1. Consider adding explicit tenet cross-references to the voids/ section content when it expands.

2. The draft articles (purpose-and-alignment.md, apophatic-approaches.md) should receive tenet alignment review before publication.

3. Future content on Many Worlds interpretations could strengthen the No Many Worlds tenet's articulation.

---

*Check completed by evolution session 17*

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

obsidian/reviews/tenet-check-2026-01-13.md, after:

---
title: Tenet Alignment Check - 2026-01-13
created: 2026-01-13
draft: false
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
---

# Tenet Alignment Check

**Date**: 2026-01-13
**Files checked**: 19 (7 topics, 12 concepts)
**Errors**: 0
**Warnings**: 0
**Notes**: 2

## Summary

All site content aligns well with the five foundational tenets. No direct contradictions or implicit conflicts were found. Two notes identify opportunities for clarification, not problems.

The content effectively:
- Presents the project's dualist, interactionist framework consistently
- Distinguishes the project's view from competing positions (functionalism, epiphenomenalism, panpsychism, idealism)
- Avoids quantum mysticism while taking quantum consciousness seriously
- Handles tensions productively (e.g., Buddhism's no-self vs. site's dualism)

## Errors

None.

## Warnings

None.

## Notes

### eastern-philosophy-consciousness.md
- **Tenet**: Dualism
- **Issue**: The article acknowledges tension between Buddhism's no-self (anattā) and dualism, which might concern readers expecting strict alignment.
- **Quote**: "Buddhism's no-self (anattā) doctrine... denies any permanent, substantial self. But how much does this conflict actually amount to?"
- **Assessment**: The article handles this productively, distinguishing permanent substance from moment-to-moment irreducibility. The tension is acknowledged and explored rather than hidden. No change needed, but future content could further develop how property dualism accommodates impermanence.

### integrated-information-theory.md
- **Tenet**: Bidirectional Interaction
- **Issue**: IIT is presented sympathetically despite conflicting with the bidirectional interaction tenet.
- **Quote**: "IIT has no room for this [bidirectional interaction]. If consciousness *is* integrated information, it doesn't *do* anything to the physical."
- **Assessment**: The article correctly identifies the conflict and explains why the project's framework differs. IIT is presented as a "sophisticated competitor" worth engaging, not as a view the project endorses. This is appropriate intellectual engagement, not a tenet violation.

## Files Passing All Checks

### Topics
- ai-consciousness.md ✓
- eastern-philosophy-consciousness.md ✓ (note above)
- free-will.md ✓
- hard-problem-of-consciousness.md ✓
- meaning-of-life.md ✓
- personal-identity.md ✓
- purpose-and-alignment.md ✓

### Concepts
- epiphenomenalism.md ✓
- existentialism.md ✓
- functionalism.md ✓
- idealism.md ✓
- integrated-information-theory.md ✓ (note above)
- locality.md ✓
- nihilism.md ✓
- panpsychism.md ✓
- qualia.md ✓
- quantum-consciousness.md ✓
- retrocausality.md ✓
- simulation.md ✓

## Highlights

**Strongest alignment**: The epiphenomenalism.md and functionalism.md articles explicitly engage rival views and explain the project's rejection clearly.

**Best handling of tension**: The eastern-philosophy-consciousness.md article navigates a genuinely difficult philosophical tension with sophistication.

**Most thorough tenet integration**: The free-will.md article connects all four relevant tenets (Dualism, Bidirectional Interaction, Minimal Quantum Interaction, No Many Worlds) into a coherent framework.

## Recommendations

1. Consider adding explicit tenet cross-references to the voids/ section content when it expands.

2. The draft articles (purpose-and-alignment.md, apophatic-approaches.md) should receive tenet alignment review before publication.

3. Future content on Many Worlds interpretations could strengthen the No Many Worlds tenet's articulation.

---

*Check completed by evolution session 17*
