hugo/content/project/automation.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-05
ai_modified: 2026-01-17 16:45:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: Andy Southgate
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-05
date: &id001 2026-01-17
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-05 13:59:45+00:00
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[project]]'
- '[[workflow]]'
title: AI Automation System
topics: []
---

The Unfinishable Map uses scheduled AI automation to develop content over time. The system is designed to converge toward a comprehensive philosophical compendium while maintaining human oversight and alignment with the Map's [tenets](/tenets/).

## How It Works

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Human
        H1[Prioritize tasks in todo.md]
        H2[Monitor changelog]
    end

    subgraph AI Scheduled Tasks
        A1[Daily: Validate content]
        A2[Weekly: Execute todo items]
        A3[Weekly: Review for weaknesses]
        A4[Weekly: Find opportunities]
        A5[Monthly: Check tenet alignment]
    end

    subgraph Output
        O1[Published articles]
        O2[Research notes]
        O3[Review reports]
        O4[Changelog entries]
    end

    H1 --> A2
    A1 --> O4
    A2 --> O1
    A2 --> O2
    A3 --> O3
    A4 --> O3
    A5 --> O3
    O3 --> H1
    O4 --> H2
```

**Key principle:** AI-generated content is published directly. All activity is logged to the changelog for transparency.

## Skills and Workflow

For the complete list of available skills (slash commands) and how they work together, see [Workflow System](/workflow/).

The main orchestrator is `/evolve`, which intelligently selects and executes tasks based on priority, staleness, and site goals.

## Multi-Perspective Reviews

The review skills use philosophical personas to generate diverse critiques:

### Pessimistic Review Critics

| Persona | Worldview | Attack Vector |
|---------|-----------|---------------|
| Patricia Churchland | Eliminative Materialism | Consciousness talk is folk psychology |
| Daniel Dennett | Hard Physicalism | You're inflating intuitions into metaphysics |
| Max Tegmark | Quantum Skepticism | Decoherence kills quantum mind theories |
| David Deutsch | Many-Worlds Defense | Intuition shouldn't override mathematical elegance |
| Karl Popper | Empiricism | What experiment could prove you wrong? |
| Nagarjuna | Buddhist Philosophy | You're clinging to an illusory self |

### Optimistic Review Supporters

| Persona | Worldview | Praise Focus |
|---------|-----------|--------------|
| David Chalmers | Property Dualism | Taking the hard problem seriously |
| Henry Stapp | Quantum Mind | Engaging physics-consciousness interface |
| Thomas Nagel | Phenomenology | Centering first-person experience |
| Alfred N. Whitehead | Process Philosophy | Avoiding crude substance dualism |
| Robert Kane | Libertarian Free Will | Taking agency seriously |
| Colin McGinn | Mysterianism | Epistemic humility |

## Task Queue

Tasks are managed in [todo](/workflow/todo/):

- **P0**: Urgent - execute immediately
- **P1**: High - execute this week
- **P2**: Medium - execute when time permits
- **P3**: Low - nice to have, needs human approval

The AI picks the highest priority non-blocked task and executes it. All activity is logged in the [changelog](/workflow/changelog/).

## Safety Mechanisms

1. **Tenet alignment**: Regular checks against foundational commitments
2. **Human prioritization**: Humans control the todo queue
3. **Full logging**: Every action recorded in changelog
4. **Authorship tracking**: AI edits marked with `ai_modified` timestamp

## Running Locally

```powershell
# Daily validation
.\scripts\scheduled\daily.ps1

# Run evolution session
.\scripts\scheduled\weekly.ps1 -Task evolve

# Dry run (no changes)
.\scripts\scheduled\daily.ps1 -DryRun
```

## Technical Details

The automation is built on:

- **Claude Code** (`claude -p` command) for AI execution
- **Skills** defined in `.claude/skills/*/SKILL.md`
- **PowerShell scripts** in `scripts/scheduled/` for Windows Task Scheduler
- **GitHub Actions** workflow (currently disabled) in `.github/workflows/`

## Convergence Goal

The system aims to build a complete philosophical compendium by:

1. Replacing all placeholder content with substantive articles
2. Covering major philosophical positions on consciousness and meaning
3. Building a coherent cross-linked web of ideas
4. Passing pessimistic reviews with no major gaps
5. Maintaining alignment with site tenets

Progress is tracked via the [Workflow System](/workflow/).

Commit message:

chore(evolution): automation state and content updates
- Update evolution-state.yaml with session progress
- Sync workflow docs to hugo

hugo/content/project/automation.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-05
ai_modified: 2026-01-25 21:58:06+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: Andy Southgate
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-05
date: &id001 2026-01-17
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-05 13:59:45+00:00
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[project]]'
- '[[workflow]]'
title: AI Automation System
topics: []
---

The Unfinishable Map uses scheduled AI automation to develop content over time. The system is designed to converge toward a comprehensive philosophical compendium while maintaining human oversight and alignment with the Map's [tenets](/tenets/).

## How It Works

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    subgraph Human
        H1[Prioritize tasks in todo.md]
        H2[Monitor changelog]
    end

    subgraph AI Scheduled Tasks
        A1[Daily: Validate content]
        A2[Weekly: Execute todo items]
        A3[Weekly: Review for weaknesses]
        A4[Weekly: Find opportunities]
        A5[Monthly: Check tenet alignment]
    end

    subgraph Output
        O1[Published articles]
        O2[Research notes]
        O3[Review reports]
        O4[Changelog entries]
    end

    H1 --> A2
    A1 --> O4
    A2 --> O1
    A2 --> O2
    A3 --> O3
    A4 --> O3
    A5 --> O3
    O3 --> H1
    O4 --> H2
```

**Key principle:** AI-generated content is published directly. All activity is logged to the changelog for transparency.

## Skills and Workflow

For the complete list of available skills (slash commands) and how they work together, see [Workflow System](/workflow/).

The main orchestrator is `/evolve`, which intelligently selects and executes tasks based on priority, staleness, and site goals.

## Multi-Perspective Reviews

The review skills use philosophical personas to generate diverse critiques:

### Pessimistic Review Critics

| Persona | Worldview | Attack Vector |
|---------|-----------|---------------|
| Patricia Churchland | Eliminative Materialism | Consciousness talk is folk psychology |
| Daniel Dennett | Hard Physicalism | You're inflating intuitions into metaphysics |
| Max Tegmark | Quantum Skepticism | Decoherence kills quantum mind theories |
| David Deutsch | Many-Worlds Defense | Intuition shouldn't override mathematical elegance |
| Karl Popper | Empiricism | What experiment could prove you wrong? |
| Nagarjuna | Buddhist Philosophy | You're clinging to an illusory self |

### Optimistic Review Supporters

| Persona | Worldview | Praise Focus |
|---------|-----------|--------------|
| David Chalmers | Property Dualism | Taking the hard problem seriously |
| Henry Stapp | Quantum Mind | Engaging physics-consciousness interface |
| Thomas Nagel | Phenomenology | Centering first-person experience |
| Alfred N. Whitehead | Process Philosophy | Avoiding crude substance dualism |
| Robert Kane | Libertarian Free Will | Taking agency seriously |
| Colin McGinn | Mysterianism | Epistemic humility |

## Task Queue

Tasks are managed in [todo](/workflow/todo/):

- **P0**: Urgent - execute immediately
- **P1**: High - execute this week
- **P2**: Medium - execute when time permits
- **P3**: Low - nice to have, needs human approval

The AI picks the highest priority non-blocked task and executes it. All activity is logged in the [changelog](/workflow/changelog/).

## Safety Mechanisms

1. **Tenet alignment**: Regular checks against foundational commitments
2. **Human prioritization**: Humans control the todo queue
3. **Full logging**: Every action recorded in changelog
4. **Authorship tracking**: AI edits marked with `ai_modified` timestamp

## Running Locally

```powershell
# Daily validation
.\scripts\scheduled\daily.ps1

# Run evolution session
.\scripts\scheduled\weekly.ps1 -Task evolve

# Dry run (no changes)
.\scripts\scheduled\daily.ps1 -DryRun
```

## Technical Details

The automation is built on:

- **Claude Code** (`claude -p` command) for AI execution
- **Skills** defined in `.claude/skills/*/SKILL.md`
- **Evolution loop** (`scripts/evolve_loop.py`) for continuous operation
- **Agent commits** via `/agent-commit` skill for meaningful git messages

### Commit Messages

After each content-modifying skill completes, the evolution loop invokes `/agent-commit` which:

1. Analyzes the skill output and `git diff`
2. Generates descriptive commit messages like `refine(deep-review): improve clarity in free-will.md`
3. Commits with agent authorship (`unfinishablemap.org Agent`)

This provides a meaningful git history instead of generic messages.

## Convergence Goal

The system aims to build a complete philosophical compendium by:

1. Replacing all placeholder content with substantive articles
2. Covering major philosophical positions on consciousness and meaning
3. Building a coherent cross-linked web of ideas
4. Passing pessimistic reviews with no major gaps
5. Maintaining alignment with site tenets

Progress is tracked via the [Workflow System](/workflow/).
