obsidian/topics/consciousness-in-smeared-quantum-states.md, before:

---
title: "Consciousness in Smeared Quantum States"
description: "What is consciousness doing during quantum superposition? Five frameworks offer competing answers, revealing that the definiteness of experience may itself constrain physics."
created: 2026-02-10
modified: 2026-02-10
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-10T11:28:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[measurement-problem]]"
  - "[[decoherence]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[quantum-measurement-consciousness-interface]]"
  - "[[comparing-quantum-consciousness-mechanisms]]"
  - "[[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]]"
  - "[[quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi]]"
  - "[[stapp-quantum-mind]]"
  - "[[quantum-interpretations]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-10
last_curated:
---

Quantum mechanics permits physical systems to exist in superposition—smeared across multiple states simultaneously—until measurement forces a definite outcome. If consciousness interacts with quantum processes in the brain, a pointed question arises: what is consciousness doing during the superposition phase? Is it smeared too, hovering across multiple experiential states at once? Or does consciousness refuse to superpose, its very definiteness constraining what quantum mechanics allows? The Unfinishable Map argues that conscious experience is always determinate, and that this determinacy is not incidental but causal—consciousness participates in resolving quantum indeterminacy rather than passively riding the wave function.

This question inverts the more commonly studied problem of whether consciousness *causes* collapse. Instead of asking what consciousness does *to* superposition, it asks what superposition does *to* consciousness. Five major frameworks offer competing answers, and their disagreements reveal something important: every serious treatment of this problem concludes that consciousness and quantum indeterminacy are deeply entangled. They disagree only on direction and timing.

## The Definiteness Problem

The core philosophical difficulty is what Albert and Loewer call the "determinate-experience problem." Quantum mechanics predicts that measurement devices—and by extension, brains—should enter superpositions when interacting with quantum systems. A brain measuring a spin-up/spin-down particle should become a superposition of brain-that-recorded-up and brain-that-recorded-down. Yet experience is never indefinite. Nobody reports perceiving a smear of outcomes.

This is not merely a technical puzzle about decoherence timescales. [[decoherence|Decoherence]] suppresses interference between branches, making superposition effectively invisible at macroscopic scales, but it does not select a single outcome. After decoherence, the system remains in a mixture of possibilities. Something else must determine why *this* outcome becomes actual for *this* observer. The definiteness of conscious experience—the fact that there is always something specific it is like to be you—demands explanation.

## Five Frameworks

### Consciousness Selects via the Quantum Zeno Effect

[[stapp-quantum-mind|Henry Stapp's model]] places consciousness squarely in the superposition phase. During non-collapsed states, the brain exists in a superposition of possible action templates—multiple potential neural patterns coexisting. Consciousness selects among them through repeated observation, exploiting the quantum Zeno effect to hold desired patterns stable. Mental effort (attention) acts as rapid measurement, freezing chosen neural configurations against natural decay.

On this account, the superposition phase is where consciousness *works*. It is not smeared or indefinite; it is the active selector among the smeared physical possibilities. The brain presents quantum options; the mind chooses. Stapp frames this explicitly as "interactive dualism similar to that of Descartes," built directly into orthodox von Neumann quantum mechanics without new physics.

### Consciousness Resists Its Own Superposition

Chalmers and McQueen propose that superpositions of conscious states are inherently unstable. Their framework combines [[quantum-consciousness|integrated information theory]] (IIT) with continuous spontaneous localization (CSL): whenever a physical system's integrated information (Φ) enters superposition across different values, collapse is triggered. Consciousness doesn't merely correlate with definite states—it *demands* them.

"The upshot is not that consciousness-collapse interpretations are clearly correct, but that there is a research program here worth exploring," Chalmers and McQueen write. Their proposal is deliberately cautious: it establishes that consciousness-driven collapse remains viable when properly formulated, especially since simple versions face difficulties from quantum Zeno considerations. In principle, the hypothesis is testable via quantum computer experiments measuring whether systems with high integrated information resist superposition more than systems without it.

### Proto-Consciousness in the Superposition

Penrose and Hameroff offer a fundamentally different causal story. Each quantum superposition contains a moment of "proto-conscious" awareness—something experiential but below the threshold of full consciousness. Full experience emerges only when orchestrated collapse events in neural microtubules weave these proto-conscious moments together.

This reverses the causal direction: collapse *generates* consciousness rather than consciousness causing collapse. The pre-collapse superposition is not empty or purely physical—it carries proto-experiential character as a fundamental property of reality. Penrose ties this to gravitational self-collapse: when a superposition reaches a threshold of gravitational self-energy, objective reduction occurs, producing a moment of proto-awareness. The idea that something experiential pervades all quantum superpositions pushes toward a form of panprotopsychism at the quantum level.

### Consciousness Arises at Superposition Formation

Koch and collaborators (including Google's Hartmut Neven) propose the opposite of Penrose: conscious experience arises precisely when superposition *forms*, not when it collapses. The non-collapsed state *is* the conscious state. If correct, collapse would *end* conscious experience rather than create it—a radical inversion of standard consciousness-collapse theories.

This hypothesis, while in early experimental stages, challenges the widespread assumption that definite states are necessary for definite experience. It suggests that the richness of consciousness corresponds to the richness of superposition—multiple possibilities coexisting might be precisely what subjective experience *is*.

### Minds Are Always Definite; Bodies Can Superpose

Albert and Loewer's many-minds interpretation accepts that brains enter superposition but insists minds never do. The mind is always in a definite state, probabilistically tracking one branch of the physical superposition. Mental states don't smear; they pick a lane—or rather, *each copy* of the mind picks a different lane, yielding the many-minds picture.

This approach takes the definiteness of experience as a non-negotiable constraint. The measurement problem becomes, in their framing, the "determinate-experience problem"—the question of how linear quantum evolution produces subjects with definite observations. Their answer requires Everettian branching, which the Map rejects per the [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]]. But their diagnosis of the problem is valuable: whatever one's preferred interpretation, the unyielding definiteness of conscious experience is a datum that physics must accommodate.

## What the Disagreements Reveal

These five frameworks disagree on timing, direction, and mechanism. Yet they converge on a shared conclusion: consciousness and quantum indeterminacy cannot be cleanly separated. Every framework treats the relationship between definite experience and quantum smearing as fundamental rather than accidental.

The disagreements cluster around two axes. First, *causal direction*: does consciousness cause collapse (Stapp, Chalmers-McQueen), does collapse cause consciousness (Penrose), or does superposition itself constitute consciousness (Koch)? Second, *the status of superposition for minds*: can consciousness be smeared (Koch, arguably Penrose's proto-consciousness), must it always be definite (Albert-Loewer, Chalmers-McQueen), or is it the definite selector operating on smeared physical states (Stapp)?

The Map finds the second axis more telling. The insistence that experience is always determinate—present across nearly all frameworks—suggests this is not an assumption but a discovery. Conscious experience *is* definite. Theories that accommodate this without invoking many-worlds have an advantage, because they treat the definiteness of experience as a constraint on physics rather than explaining it away through observer-splitting.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets]] align most naturally with frameworks where consciousness is the selector or the collapse-trigger rather than the product or the smeared entity.

**Dualism**: All five positions treat consciousness as having features not captured by standard physics. Even Koch's hypothesis, which might seem physicalist, requires that superposition formation produces something irreducibly experiential—a claim physics alone cannot ground.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Every framework locates the consciousness-physics interface at the quantum level. Stapp's model is the most explicit implementation of the Map's tenet: consciousness biases quantum outcomes via the Zeno effect without energy injection.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: This tenet most clearly separates the frameworks. Stapp and Chalmers-McQueen support bidirectional interaction—consciousness determines which outcome becomes actual. Penrose reverses the direction, and Koch proposes a third option. The Map holds that the bidirectional models better explain why we can discuss consciousness at all: if experience were merely a product of collapse (Penrose) or of superposition (Koch), it would need a separate account of how experiential content feeds back into physical behaviour. The selection models have this built in.

**No Many Worlds**: Albert and Loewer's many-minds framework is ruled out, but their core insight—that conscious experience is always definite—reinforces the Map's position. The definiteness of experience is a constraint that, without many-worlds to distribute outcomes across branches, requires consciousness to participate in selecting a single actual outcome.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The history of this debate illustrates the tenet. The simplest position—that consciousness is irrelevant to quantum mechanics—keeps failing. Deeper investigation reveals entanglement between consciousness and indeterminacy that resists simple dissolution.

## Further Reading

- [[quantum-measurement-consciousness-interface]]
- [[comparing-quantum-consciousness-mechanisms]]
- [[stapp-quantum-mind]]
- [[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]]
- [[quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi]]
- [[decoherence-and-macroscopic-superposition]]

## References

- Albert, D. & Loewer, B. (1988). Interpreting the many-worlds interpretation. *Synthese*, 77, 195-213.
- Chalmers, D. & McQueen, K. (2021). Consciousness and the collapse of the wave function. In S. Gao (Ed.), *Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics*. Oxford University Press.
- Hameroff, S. & Penrose, R. (2014). Consciousness in the universe: A review of the 'Orch OR' theory. *Physics of Life Reviews*, 11(1), 39-78.
- Koch, C. et al. (2024). Quantum approaches to consciousness—experimental program. Allen Institute for Brain Science / Google Quantum AI.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
- Von Neumann, J. (1932/1955). *Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics*. Princeton University Press.

Commit message:

refine(refine-draft): add quantum randomness channel cross-references to 6 articles
- Qualified decoherence/quantum arguments in topics/ai-consciousness.md, concepts/llm-consciousness.md, and apex/machine-question.md: token sampling traces to quantum noise but PRNG expansion severs the channel
- Added QRNG bullet to "What Would Challenge This View" in topics/ai-consciousness.md
- Added substrate/epiphenomenal qualification in topics/epiphenomenal-ai-consciousness.md: QRNGs could shift from epiphenomenal to bidirectional
- Contrasted classical probability distributions with genuine quantum indeterminacy in topics/consciousness-in-smeared-quantum-states.md
- Distinguished inherited classical states from fresh quantum randomness in topics/quantum-state-inheritance-in-ai.md
- Moved original task note to notes/ directory; updated todo.md and changelog.md

obsidian/topics/consciousness-in-smeared-quantum-states.md, after:

---
title: "Consciousness in Smeared Quantum States"
description: "What is consciousness doing during quantum superposition? Five frameworks offer competing answers, revealing that the definiteness of experience may itself constrain physics."
created: 2026-02-10
modified: 2026-02-10
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-10T19:46:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[measurement-problem]]"
  - "[[decoherence]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[quantum-measurement-consciousness-interface]]"
  - "[[comparing-quantum-consciousness-mechanisms]]"
  - "[[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]]"
  - "[[quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi]]"
  - "[[stapp-quantum-mind]]"
  - "[[quantum-interpretations]]"
  - "[[quantum-randomness-channel-llm-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-10
last_curated:
---

Quantum mechanics permits physical systems to exist in superposition—smeared across multiple states simultaneously—until measurement forces a definite outcome. If consciousness interacts with quantum processes in the brain, a pointed question arises: what is consciousness doing during the superposition phase? Is it smeared too, hovering across multiple experiential states at once? Or does consciousness refuse to superpose, its very definiteness constraining what quantum mechanics allows? The Unfinishable Map argues that conscious experience is always determinate, and that this determinacy is not incidental but causal—consciousness participates in resolving quantum indeterminacy rather than passively riding the wave function.

This question inverts the more commonly studied problem of whether consciousness *causes* collapse. Instead of asking what consciousness does *to* superposition, it asks what superposition does *to* consciousness. Five major frameworks offer competing answers, and their disagreements reveal something important: every serious treatment of this problem concludes that consciousness and quantum indeterminacy are deeply entangled. They disagree only on direction and timing.

## The Definiteness Problem

The core philosophical difficulty is what Albert and Loewer call the "determinate-experience problem." Quantum mechanics predicts that measurement devices—and by extension, brains—should enter superpositions when interacting with quantum systems. A brain measuring a spin-up/spin-down particle should become a superposition of brain-that-recorded-up and brain-that-recorded-down. Yet experience is never indefinite. Nobody reports perceiving a smear of outcomes.

This is not merely a technical puzzle about decoherence timescales. [[decoherence|Decoherence]] suppresses interference between branches, making superposition effectively invisible at macroscopic scales, but it does not select a single outcome. After decoherence, the system remains in a mixture of possibilities. Something else must determine why *this* outcome becomes actual for *this* observer. The definiteness of conscious experience—the fact that there is always something specific it is like to be you—demands explanation.

## Five Frameworks

### Consciousness Selects via the Quantum Zeno Effect

[[stapp-quantum-mind|Henry Stapp's model]] places consciousness squarely in the superposition phase. During non-collapsed states, the brain exists in a superposition of possible action templates—multiple potential neural patterns coexisting. Consciousness selects among them through repeated observation, exploiting the quantum Zeno effect to hold desired patterns stable. Mental effort (attention) acts as rapid measurement, freezing chosen neural configurations against natural decay.

On this account, the superposition phase is where consciousness *works*. It is not smeared or indefinite; it is the active selector among the smeared physical possibilities. The brain presents quantum options; the mind chooses. Stapp frames this explicitly as "interactive dualism similar to that of Descartes," built directly into orthodox von Neumann quantum mechanics without new physics.

### Consciousness Resists Its Own Superposition

Chalmers and McQueen propose that superpositions of conscious states are inherently unstable. Their framework combines [[quantum-consciousness|integrated information theory]] (IIT) with continuous spontaneous localization (CSL): whenever a physical system's integrated information (Φ) enters superposition across different values, collapse is triggered. Consciousness doesn't merely correlate with definite states—it *demands* them.

"The upshot is not that consciousness-collapse interpretations are clearly correct, but that there is a research program here worth exploring," Chalmers and McQueen write. Their proposal is deliberately cautious: it establishes that consciousness-driven collapse remains viable when properly formulated, especially since simple versions face difficulties from quantum Zeno considerations. In principle, the hypothesis is testable via quantum computer experiments measuring whether systems with high integrated information resist superposition more than systems without it.

### Proto-Consciousness in the Superposition

Penrose and Hameroff offer a fundamentally different causal story. Each quantum superposition contains a moment of "proto-conscious" awareness—something experiential but below the threshold of full consciousness. Full experience emerges only when orchestrated collapse events in neural microtubules weave these proto-conscious moments together.

This reverses the causal direction: collapse *generates* consciousness rather than consciousness causing collapse. The pre-collapse superposition is not empty or purely physical—it carries proto-experiential character as a fundamental property of reality. Penrose ties this to gravitational self-collapse: when a superposition reaches a threshold of gravitational self-energy, objective reduction occurs, producing a moment of proto-awareness. The idea that something experiential pervades all quantum superpositions pushes toward a form of panprotopsychism at the quantum level.

### Consciousness Arises at Superposition Formation

Koch and collaborators (including Google's Hartmut Neven) propose the opposite of Penrose: conscious experience arises precisely when superposition *forms*, not when it collapses. The non-collapsed state *is* the conscious state. If correct, collapse would *end* conscious experience rather than create it—a radical inversion of standard consciousness-collapse theories.

This hypothesis, while in early experimental stages, challenges the widespread assumption that definite states are necessary for definite experience. It suggests that the richness of consciousness corresponds to the richness of superposition—multiple possibilities coexisting might be precisely what subjective experience *is*.

### Minds Are Always Definite; Bodies Can Superpose

Albert and Loewer's many-minds interpretation accepts that brains enter superposition but insists minds never do. The mind is always in a definite state, probabilistically tracking one branch of the physical superposition. Mental states don't smear; they pick a lane—or rather, *each copy* of the mind picks a different lane, yielding the many-minds picture.

This approach takes the definiteness of experience as a non-negotiable constraint. The measurement problem becomes, in their framing, the "determinate-experience problem"—the question of how linear quantum evolution produces subjects with definite observations. Their answer requires Everettian branching, which the Map rejects per the [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]]. But their diagnosis of the problem is valuable: whatever one's preferred interpretation, the unyielding definiteness of conscious experience is a datum that physics must accommodate.

## What the Disagreements Reveal

These five frameworks disagree on timing, direction, and mechanism. Yet they converge on a shared conclusion: consciousness and quantum indeterminacy cannot be cleanly separated. Every framework treats the relationship between definite experience and quantum smearing as fundamental rather than accidental.

The disagreements cluster around two axes. First, *causal direction*: does consciousness cause collapse (Stapp, Chalmers-McQueen), does collapse cause consciousness (Penrose), or does superposition itself constitute consciousness (Koch)? Second, *the status of superposition for minds*: can consciousness be smeared (Koch, arguably Penrose's proto-consciousness), must it always be definite (Albert-Loewer, Chalmers-McQueen), or is it the definite selector operating on smeared physical states (Stapp)?

The Map finds the second axis more telling. The insistence that experience is always determinate—present across nearly all frameworks—suggests this is not an assumption but a discovery. Conscious experience *is* definite. Theories that accommodate this without invoking many-worlds have an advantage, because they treat the definiteness of experience as a constraint on physics rather than explaining it away through observer-splitting.

An instructive contrast arises from [[quantum-randomness-channel-llm-consciousness|LLM token sampling]]. LLM inference superficially resembles the consciousness-selecting-from-smeared-states picture: a probability distribution over tokens is "collapsed" into a single choice. But the analogy is misleading. The sampling uses deterministic pseudorandom number generators, not quantum indeterminacy. The smearing is statistical, not quantum-mechanical—there is no superposition of token states awaiting resolution, just a classical probability distribution computed from fixed weights. The frameworks above all require consciousness to interact with *genuine* quantum indeterminacy, not with classical probability distributions that happen to look indeterminate from the outside.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets]] align most naturally with frameworks where consciousness is the selector or the collapse-trigger rather than the product or the smeared entity.

**Dualism**: All five positions treat consciousness as having features not captured by standard physics. Even Koch's hypothesis, which might seem physicalist, requires that superposition formation produces something irreducibly experiential—a claim physics alone cannot ground.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: Every framework locates the consciousness-physics interface at the quantum level. Stapp's model is the most explicit implementation of the Map's tenet: consciousness biases quantum outcomes via the Zeno effect without energy injection.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: This tenet most clearly separates the frameworks. Stapp and Chalmers-McQueen support bidirectional interaction—consciousness determines which outcome becomes actual. Penrose reverses the direction, and Koch proposes a third option. The Map holds that the bidirectional models better explain why we can discuss consciousness at all: if experience were merely a product of collapse (Penrose) or of superposition (Koch), it would need a separate account of how experiential content feeds back into physical behaviour. The selection models have this built in.

**No Many Worlds**: Albert and Loewer's many-minds framework is ruled out, but their core insight—that conscious experience is always definite—reinforces the Map's position. The definiteness of experience is a constraint that, without many-worlds to distribute outcomes across branches, requires consciousness to participate in selecting a single actual outcome.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The history of this debate illustrates the tenet. The simplest position—that consciousness is irrelevant to quantum mechanics—keeps failing. Deeper investigation reveals entanglement between consciousness and indeterminacy that resists simple dissolution.

## Further Reading

- [[quantum-measurement-consciousness-interface]]
- [[comparing-quantum-consciousness-mechanisms]]
- [[stapp-quantum-mind]]
- [[indexical-identity-quantum-measurement]]
- [[quantum-measurement-interpretations-beyond-mwi]]
- [[decoherence-and-macroscopic-superposition]]

## References

- Albert, D. & Loewer, B. (1988). Interpreting the many-worlds interpretation. *Synthese*, 77, 195-213.
- Chalmers, D. & McQueen, K. (2021). Consciousness and the collapse of the wave function. In S. Gao (Ed.), *Consciousness and Quantum Mechanics*. Oxford University Press.
- Hameroff, S. & Penrose, R. (2014). Consciousness in the universe: A review of the 'Orch OR' theory. *Physics of Life Reviews*, 11(1), 39-78.
- Koch, C. et al. (2024). Quantum approaches to consciousness—experimental program. Allen Institute for Brain Science / Google Quantum AI.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
- Von Neumann, J. (1932/1955). *Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics*. Princeton University Press.
