obsidian/topics/death-and-consciousness.md, before:

---
title: "Death and Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-14T21:10:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[near-death-experiences]]"
  - "[[loss-of-consciousness]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[meaning-of-life]]"
  - "[[death-consciousness-persistence-2026-01-14]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
---

Does consciousness survive bodily death? The site's dualist framework makes survival a coherent possibility that materialism forecloses. If consciousness is immaterial and irreducible, nothing in principle prevents it from persisting when the body fails. This doesn't *guarantee* survival—functional dependence on brains might be essential even for non-physical minds. But dualism keeps the question genuinely open in ways materialism cannot. Combined with the site's emphasis on [[personal-identity|indexical identity]]—the view that *you* are irreplaceable rather than a mere pattern—this creates distinctive resources for thinking about death.

## The Stakes

On materialism, death is simple: consciousness is identical with or produced by brain processes; when the brain stops, consciousness ends. The question of survival doesn't arise because there's nothing to survive. As the materialist sees it, asking whether consciousness continues after brain death is like asking whether digestion continues after the digestive system is destroyed.

Dualism opens a different possibility. If consciousness isn't reducible to neural activity—if the [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]] reveals that something more than physics is involved—then the fate of consciousness isn't determined by the fate of neurons. The brain might be necessary for consciousness *in its current mode* without being necessary for consciousness *per se*.

The distinction matters. C.J. Ducasse's radio analogy captures it: destroying a radio ends the program locally, but the broadcast continues. If the brain is a receiver or interface rather than the generator of consciousness, brain death might alter how consciousness manifests without destroying it.

## The Identity Problem

Any account of survival must address [[personal-identity]]. What makes the consciousness that survives *yours*? This is where the site's commitment to indexical identity becomes relevant.

Derek Parfit famously argued that personal identity may have no determinate answer in survival cases, but this doesn't matter—what matters is psychological continuity, which could be preserved by replicas. On this view, a perfect copy of your psychological patterns would preserve everything important about you.

The site rejects this. As discussed in the [[personal-identity]] article, indexical identity—the fact that *this* consciousness is the one having these experiences—matters independently of psychological continuity. A duplicate of you is not you; it's someone new with similar memories. The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] reflects this: identity questions have determinate answers, and merely similar beings don't inherit your identity.

This creates both resources and constraints for thinking about survival:

**The resource**: If you are essentially *this* particular consciousness rather than a pattern that could be reinstantiated, then survival means the continuation of *this* subject, not the creation of a qualitatively similar one. This gives content to what survival would mean.

**The constraint**: Any account of survival must preserve indexical identity, not just psychological similarity. Resurrection through recreation—God rebuilding your body and mind from scratch—wouldn't secure survival on this view. As Peter van Inwagen argued, reassembling a cremated person's molecules would yield a duplicate, not the original.

## Dualist Possibilities

Substance dualism permits survival most straightforwardly: if consciousness is a distinct immaterial substance, it might persist when its physical substrate fails. But this raises questions about *how* it persists. H.H. Price developed a detailed conception of "dream-image" disembodied existence—consciousness continuing in a realm of mental imagery without physical embodiment.

Property dualism is more complex. If consciousness is a non-physical property of physical systems, what happens when those systems cease? The property might require a substrate to instantiate it. Yet if the property is genuinely non-physical, the substrate needn't be material—perhaps consciousness could be re-instantiated in a different medium.

The site's [[interactionist-dualism]] leaves these questions open. What matters is that consciousness is irreducible and causally efficacious. Whether it can exist without its current physical interface is a further question the framework doesn't settle.

## Near-Death Experiences

[[near-death-experiences|Near-death experiences]] (NDEs)—now termed "Recalled Experience of Death" (RED) by a 2022 multidisciplinary consensus—provide intriguing, if contested, evidence for consciousness beyond brain function. The terminology shift matters: RED emphasizes that subjects recall awareness *during* documented physiological death, not merely near it.

Common features include out-of-body perception, life review, encounters with deceased relatives, passage through tunnels toward light, and profound mental clarity. Crucially, approximately 40% of cardiac arrest survivors report some form of awareness during the event—yet only 18% in Van Lommel's landmark study reported full NDEs. Something distinguishes experiencers from non-experiencers, and that something remains unexplained.

**Key research findings:**

The AWARE II studies (culminating in 2023) documented systematic patterns across multiple hospital sites. A 2024 study documented gamma wave surges in dying brains—the first human evidence of "end-of-life surge" previously observed only in rats. Two of four patients showed coherent gamma activity in regions associated with consciousness, persisting for minutes after cardiac arrest.

The philosophical significance: NDEs occur when brains are severely compromised. If consciousness depends entirely on neural function, heightened and coherent experience during brain failure is paradoxical. The "paradox of heightened experience" challenges simple brain-production models—subjects report mental clarity exceeding normal waking consciousness precisely when neural function should be at its lowest.

Materialist explanations exist: ketamine-like effects from hypoxia, REM intrusion, temporal lobe seizures, dying brain activity causing hallucinations. None fully accounts for the phenomena. Ketamine produces fragmented experiences unlike NDE coherence. REM intrusion doesn't explain veridical perception cases. Temporal lobe seizures typically produce fear and confusion, not the peace NDEs consistently feature. And dying brain activity, while real, raises rather than answers the question: *why* does failing neural function produce heightened consciousness?

This doesn't prove survival. But it strongly suggests the brain-consciousness relationship may be more complex than simple production. See [[near-death-experiences]] for detailed treatment of the evidence.

## Temporary Loss of Consciousness: A Preview of Death?

[[loss-of-consciousness|Temporary loss of consciousness]]—through anesthesia, coma, or brain injury—provides a natural experiment relevant to death's relationship with consciousness. The filter theory interprets these cases as disconnection rather than elimination, and this interpretation has implications for how we think about death.

**The vanishing of time**: Under general anesthesia, time doesn't merely pass quickly—it vanishes entirely. A six-hour surgery feels identical to a six-minute procedure: nothing. This differs qualitatively from sleep, where some rudimentary sense of night passing persists. If consciousness were produced by neural activity, this complete temporal gap poses a puzzle: how does the same experiencing subject exist before and after with no connecting experience? The filter theory suggests consciousness loses its temporal anchor when the brain-interface is disrupted, then re-anchors upon recovery. Death might represent permanent disconnection from temporal embedding rather than consciousness ceasing to exist.

**Covert consciousness**: Up to 25% of patients classified as behaviorally unresponsive retain awareness detectable only via neuroimaging. They understand language, follow instructions, and sustain attention despite appearing unconscious to all clinical tests. If one quarter of "unconscious" patients are actually conscious, our behavioral criteria systematically underestimate conscious presence. The dying brain, which fails even more dramatically than the anesthetized brain to produce behavioral outputs, might similarly retain consciousness invisible to external observation.

**Disconnection syndromes**: Brain damage produces specific deficits by disrupting connections rather than destroying faculties. Consciousness adapts and persists despite massive neural loss—hemispherectomy patients, missing half their cortex, maintain substantially normal conscious lives. If consciousness can survive the removal of half the brain by finding alternative pathways through what remains, what happens when all neural pathways fail? The materialist says consciousness ends. The filter theorist suggests consciousness becomes unable to interface with physical reality while potentially continuing in some form outside that interface.

These temporary states don't prove survival after death. But they complicate the assumption that brain dysfunction straightforwardly eliminates consciousness. If the relationship between consciousness and brain is more like disconnection than production, death might represent the ultimate disconnection—not the annihilation of consciousness but its permanent separation from the physical interface through which it currently operates.

## The Quantum Soul Hypothesis

Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose's [[quantum-consciousness|Orch OR theory]] generates a speculative survival hypothesis. If consciousness arises from quantum processes in microtubules, at death the "quantum information" might be released from the brain into the universe rather than destroyed.

Hameroff suggests: "It's possible that this quantum information can exist outside the body, perhaps indefinitely, as a soul."

On this view, NDEs occur when quantum information temporarily separates from the brain during cardiac arrest and returns upon resuscitation. If resuscitation fails, the information might persist elsewhere.

This hypothesis aligns with the site's [[tenets#^minimal-quantum|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]]—both propose that consciousness interfaces with physics at the quantum level. Quantum information is conserved rather than destroyed, providing a physical framework for persistence.

**Significant caveats:**

- The hypothesis is highly speculative
- Penrose himself remains materialist and skeptical of survival
- No mechanism explains how quantum information would maintain coherence outside neural systems
- The hypothesis doesn't address indexical identity—is dispersed quantum information still *you*?

## What Survival Would Mean

If survival occurs, what form would it take? Several possibilities:

**Disembodied consciousness**: Pure mental existence without physical form. Price's dream-image conception. Problems: how does consciousness individuate without spatial location? How do disembodied minds interact?

**Reembodiment**: Consciousness receives a new physical substrate—resurrection, reincarnation, or technological substrate. Problems: what maintains identity across the gap? How does this consciousness relate to the one that died?

**Absorption**: Individual consciousness merges with a larger whole, as in some Eastern and mystical traditions. This may preserve *some* consciousness without preserving *you* specifically—a tension with indexical identity.

**Quantum persistence**: Consciousness continues as quantum information distributed through spacetime. Novel framework but faces severe coherence problems.

The site's framework doesn't adjudicate between these. What it does provide is the conceptual space for survival to be meaningful—something materialism forecloses.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

**Dualism**: Makes survival coherent by denying that consciousness reduces to neural processes. If the brain is interface rather than generator, brain death might not be consciousness death.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: If consciousness operates at the quantum level, quantum conservation laws might preserve something. Speculative, but the framework suggests where to look.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: If consciousness causally influences matter rather than merely observing it, it has genuine efficacy that might persist beyond its current substrate.

**No Many Worlds**: Survival questions have determinate answers. Either *this* consciousness continues or it doesn't; there's no merely statistical or pattern-based survival. This rules out Parfit-style views where replicas preserve "what matters."

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The simplest assumption—consciousness ends with brain function—might be wrong. Our knowledge of consciousness is radically incomplete. Apparent simplicity shouldn't foreclose inquiry.

## What the Site Does Not Claim

This article doesn't argue that survival *does* occur. The evidence is suggestive but not conclusive. NDEs might have purely neural explanations. Quantum soul hypotheses might be misguided.

What the site claims: given its dualist commitments, survival is a *coherent possibility* in ways that materialism cannot accommodate. The question remains genuinely open. This matters for how we think about death, meaning, and the boundaries of our existence.

## Further Reading

- [[near-death-experiences]] — The evidence from recalled experience of death
- [[loss-of-consciousness]] — Temporary disconnection as a model for death
- [[personal-identity]] — Why indexical identity matters for survival
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Mechanisms at the consciousness-physics interface
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The framework that makes survival coherent
- [[meaning-of-life]] — How consciousness grounds significance
- [[death-consciousness-persistence-2026-01-14]] — Detailed research notes

## References

- Ducasse, C.J. (1961). *A Critical Examination of the Belief in a Life After Death*. Charles C. Thomas.
- Van Inwagen, P. (1978). "The Possibility of Resurrection." *International Journal for Philosophy of Religion*.
- Parfit, D. (1984). *Reasons and Persons*. Oxford University Press.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *Philosophical Review*.
- Rivas, T., Dirven, A., & Smit, R. (2023). *The Self Does Not Die: Verified Paranormal Phenomena from Near-Death Experiences*.
- Hameroff, S. & Chopra, D. (2012). "The 'Quantum Soul': A Scientific Hypothesis." In *Exploring Frontiers of the Mind-Brain Relationship*.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Afterlife."
- Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Immortality."

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - death-and-consciousness/filter-theory insights
Task: Cross-review death-and-consciousness.md considering filter-theory insights
Session: 88

obsidian/topics/death-and-consciousness.md, after:

---
title: "Death and Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-15T23:55:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[near-death-experiences]]"
  - "[[loss-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[filter-theory]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[meaning-of-life]]"
  - "[[death-consciousness-persistence-2026-01-14]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
---

Does consciousness survive bodily death? The site's dualist framework makes survival a coherent possibility that materialism forecloses. If consciousness is immaterial and irreducible, nothing in principle prevents it from persisting when the body fails. This doesn't *guarantee* survival—functional dependence on brains might be essential even for non-physical minds. But dualism keeps the question genuinely open in ways materialism cannot. Combined with the site's emphasis on [[personal-identity|indexical identity]]—the view that *you* are irreplaceable rather than a mere pattern—this creates distinctive resources for thinking about death.

## The Stakes

On materialism, death is simple: consciousness is identical with or produced by brain processes; when the brain stops, consciousness ends. The question of survival doesn't arise because there's nothing to survive. As the materialist sees it, asking whether consciousness continues after brain death is like asking whether digestion continues after the digestive system is destroyed.

Dualism opens a different possibility. If consciousness isn't reducible to neural activity—if the [[explanatory-gap|explanatory gap]] reveals that something more than physics is involved—then the fate of consciousness isn't determined by the fate of neurons. The brain might be necessary for consciousness *in its current mode* without being necessary for consciousness *per se*.

The distinction matters. [[filter-theory|Filter theory]]—developed by William James, Henri Bergson, and Aldous Huxley—provides a framework for understanding how consciousness might relate to brains without being produced by them. C.J. Ducasse's radio analogy captures the intuition: destroying a radio ends the program locally, but the broadcast continues. If the brain is a receiver or interface rather than the generator of consciousness, brain death might alter how consciousness manifests without destroying it.

## The Identity Problem

Any account of survival must address [[personal-identity]]. What makes the consciousness that survives *yours*? This is where the site's commitment to indexical identity becomes relevant.

Derek Parfit famously argued that personal identity may have no determinate answer in survival cases, but this doesn't matter—what matters is psychological continuity, which could be preserved by replicas. On this view, a perfect copy of your psychological patterns would preserve everything important about you.

The site rejects this. As discussed in the [[personal-identity]] article, indexical identity—the fact that *this* consciousness is the one having these experiences—matters independently of psychological continuity. A duplicate of you is not you; it's someone new with similar memories. The [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds tenet]] reflects this: identity questions have determinate answers, and merely similar beings don't inherit your identity.

This creates both resources and constraints for thinking about survival:

**The resource**: If you are essentially *this* particular consciousness rather than a pattern that could be reinstantiated, then survival means the continuation of *this* subject, not the creation of a qualitatively similar one. This gives content to what survival would mean.

**The constraint**: Any account of survival must preserve indexical identity, not just psychological similarity. Resurrection through recreation—God rebuilding your body and mind from scratch—wouldn't secure survival on this view. As Peter van Inwagen argued, reassembling a cremated person's molecules would yield a duplicate, not the original.

## Dualist Possibilities

Substance dualism permits survival most straightforwardly: if consciousness is a distinct immaterial substance, it might persist when its physical substrate fails. But this raises questions about *how* it persists. H.H. Price developed a detailed conception of "dream-image" disembodied existence—consciousness continuing in a realm of mental imagery without physical embodiment.

Property dualism is more complex. If consciousness is a non-physical property of physical systems, what happens when those systems cease? The property might require a substrate to instantiate it. Yet if the property is genuinely non-physical, the substrate needn't be material—perhaps consciousness could be re-instantiated in a different medium.

The site's [[interactionist-dualism]] leaves these questions open. What matters is that consciousness is irreducible and causally efficacious. Whether it can exist without its current physical interface is a further question the framework doesn't settle.

## Near-Death Experiences

[[near-death-experiences|Near-death experiences]] (NDEs)—now termed "Recalled Experience of Death" (RED) by a 2022 multidisciplinary consensus—provide intriguing, if contested, evidence for consciousness beyond brain function. The terminology shift matters: RED emphasizes that subjects recall awareness *during* documented physiological death, not merely near it.

Common features include out-of-body perception, life review, encounters with deceased relatives, passage through tunnels toward light, and profound mental clarity. Crucially, approximately 40% of cardiac arrest survivors report some form of awareness during the event—yet only 18% in Van Lommel's landmark study reported full NDEs. Something distinguishes experiencers from non-experiencers, and that something remains unexplained.

**Key research findings:**

The AWARE II studies (culminating in 2023) documented systematic patterns across multiple hospital sites. A 2024 study documented gamma wave surges in dying brains—the first human evidence of "end-of-life surge" previously observed only in rats. Two of four patients showed coherent gamma activity in regions associated with consciousness, persisting for minutes after cardiac arrest.

The philosophical significance: NDEs occur when brains are severely compromised. If consciousness depends entirely on neural function, heightened and coherent experience during brain failure is paradoxical. The "paradox of heightened experience" challenges simple brain-production models—subjects report mental clarity exceeding normal waking consciousness precisely when neural function should be at its lowest.

Materialist explanations exist: ketamine-like effects from hypoxia, REM intrusion, temporal lobe seizures, dying brain activity causing hallucinations. None fully accounts for the phenomena. Ketamine produces fragmented experiences unlike NDE coherence. REM intrusion doesn't explain veridical perception cases. Temporal lobe seizures typically produce fear and confusion, not the peace NDEs consistently feature. And dying brain activity, while real, raises rather than answers the question: *why* does failing neural function produce heightened consciousness?

This doesn't prove survival. But it strongly suggests the brain-consciousness relationship may be more complex than simple production. See [[near-death-experiences]] for detailed treatment of the evidence.

## Temporary Loss of Consciousness: A Preview of Death?

[[loss-of-consciousness|Temporary loss of consciousness]]—through anesthesia, coma, or brain injury—provides a natural experiment relevant to death's relationship with consciousness. The filter theory interprets these cases as disconnection rather than elimination, and this interpretation has implications for how we think about death.

**The vanishing of time**: Under general anesthesia, time doesn't merely pass quickly—it vanishes entirely. A six-hour surgery feels identical to a six-minute procedure: nothing. This differs qualitatively from sleep, where some rudimentary sense of night passing persists. If consciousness were produced by neural activity, this complete temporal gap poses a puzzle: how does the same experiencing subject exist before and after with no connecting experience? The filter theory suggests consciousness loses its temporal anchor when the brain-interface is disrupted, then re-anchors upon recovery. Death might represent permanent disconnection from temporal embedding rather than consciousness ceasing to exist.

**Covert consciousness**: Up to 25% of patients classified as behaviorally unresponsive retain awareness detectable only via neuroimaging. They understand language, follow instructions, and sustain attention despite appearing unconscious to all clinical tests. If one quarter of "unconscious" patients are actually conscious, our behavioral criteria systematically underestimate conscious presence. The dying brain, which fails even more dramatically than the anesthetized brain to produce behavioral outputs, might similarly retain consciousness invisible to external observation.

**Disconnection syndromes**: Brain damage produces specific deficits by disrupting connections rather than destroying faculties. Consciousness adapts and persists despite massive neural loss—hemispherectomy patients, missing half their cortex, maintain substantially normal conscious lives. If consciousness can survive the removal of half the brain by finding alternative pathways through what remains, what happens when all neural pathways fail? The materialist says consciousness ends. The filter theorist suggests consciousness becomes unable to interface with physical reality while potentially continuing in some form outside that interface.

These temporary states don't prove survival after death. But they complicate the assumption that brain dysfunction straightforwardly eliminates consciousness. If the relationship between consciousness and brain is more like disconnection than production, death might represent the ultimate disconnection—not the annihilation of consciousness but its permanent separation from the physical interface through which it currently operates.

## The Quantum Soul Hypothesis

Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose's [[quantum-consciousness|Orch OR theory]] generates a speculative survival hypothesis. If consciousness arises from quantum processes in microtubules, at death the "quantum information" might be released from the brain into the universe rather than destroyed.

Hameroff suggests: "It's possible that this quantum information can exist outside the body, perhaps indefinitely, as a soul."

On this view, NDEs occur when quantum information temporarily separates from the brain during cardiac arrest and returns upon resuscitation. If resuscitation fails, the information might persist elsewhere.

This hypothesis aligns with the site's [[tenets#^minimal-quantum|Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet]]—both propose that consciousness interfaces with physics at the quantum level. Quantum information is conserved rather than destroyed, providing a physical framework for persistence.

**Significant caveats:**

- The hypothesis is highly speculative
- Penrose himself remains materialist and skeptical of survival
- No mechanism explains how quantum information would maintain coherence outside neural systems
- The hypothesis doesn't address indexical identity—is dispersed quantum information still *you*?

## What Survival Would Mean

If survival occurs, what form would it take? Several possibilities:

**Disembodied consciousness**: Pure mental existence without physical form. Price's dream-image conception. Problems: how does consciousness individuate without spatial location? How do disembodied minds interact?

**Reembodiment**: Consciousness receives a new physical substrate—resurrection, reincarnation, or technological substrate. Problems: what maintains identity across the gap? How does this consciousness relate to the one that died?

**Absorption**: Individual consciousness merges with a larger whole, as in some Eastern and mystical traditions. This may preserve *some* consciousness without preserving *you* specifically—a tension with indexical identity.

**Quantum persistence**: Consciousness continues as quantum information distributed through spacetime. Novel framework but faces severe coherence problems.

The site's framework doesn't adjudicate between these. What it does provide is the conceptual space for survival to be meaningful—something materialism forecloses.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

**Dualism**: Makes survival coherent by denying that consciousness reduces to neural processes. If the brain is interface rather than generator, brain death might not be consciousness death.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction**: If consciousness operates at the quantum level, quantum conservation laws might preserve something. Speculative, but the framework suggests where to look.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: If consciousness causally influences matter rather than merely observing it, it has genuine efficacy that might persist beyond its current substrate.

**No Many Worlds**: Survival questions have determinate answers. Either *this* consciousness continues or it doesn't; there's no merely statistical or pattern-based survival. This rules out Parfit-style views where replicas preserve "what matters."

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: The simplest assumption—consciousness ends with brain function—might be wrong. Our knowledge of consciousness is radically incomplete. Apparent simplicity shouldn't foreclose inquiry.

## What the Site Does Not Claim

This article doesn't argue that survival *does* occur. The evidence is suggestive but not conclusive. NDEs might have purely neural explanations. Quantum soul hypotheses might be misguided.

What the site claims: given its dualist commitments, survival is a *coherent possibility* in ways that materialism cannot accommodate. The question remains genuinely open. This matters for how we think about death, meaning, and the boundaries of our existence.

## Further Reading

- [[near-death-experiences]] — The evidence from recalled experience of death
- [[filter-theory]] — The transmission model that reframes death as disconnection
- [[loss-of-consciousness]] — Temporary disconnection as a model for death
- [[personal-identity]] — Why indexical identity matters for survival
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Mechanisms at the consciousness-physics interface
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The framework that makes survival coherent
- [[meaning-of-life]] — How consciousness grounds significance
- [[death-consciousness-persistence-2026-01-14]] — Detailed research notes

## References

- Ducasse, C.J. (1961). *A Critical Examination of the Belief in a Life After Death*. Charles C. Thomas.
- Van Inwagen, P. (1978). "The Possibility of Resurrection." *International Journal for Philosophy of Religion*.
- Parfit, D. (1984). *Reasons and Persons*. Oxford University Press.
- Nagel, T. (1974). "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" *Philosophical Review*.
- Rivas, T., Dirven, A., & Smit, R. (2023). *The Self Does Not Die: Verified Paranormal Phenomena from Near-Death Experiences*.
- Hameroff, S. & Chopra, D. (2012). "The 'Quantum Soul': A Scientific Hypothesis." In *Exploring Frontiers of the Mind-Brain Relationship*.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Afterlife."
- Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Immortality."
