obsidian/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness.md, before:

---
title: "The Hard Problem of Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-06
modified: 2026-01-13
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-13T14:10:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[integrated-information-theory]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-06
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-01-10T15:30:00+00:00
---

Why is there something it is like to be you?

This question—deceptively simple—marks the boundary where physical explanation seems to end and mystery begins. Neuroscience can trace the cascade of neural activity when you see red, taste coffee, or feel pain. It can explain how you discriminate stimuli, report your states, and control your behaviour. Yet after all this explanation, a question remains: why is any of this accompanied by *experience*?

David Chalmers called this the "hard problem of consciousness." It is hard not because we lack data or technology, but because the very structure of physical explanation seems incapable of reaching it.

## Easy Problems and Hard Problems

Chalmers distinguishes the hard problem from what he calls the "easy problems" of consciousness—easy not because they're simple, but because we know what a solution would look like. The easy problems include:

- How do we discriminate sensory stimuli and react appropriately?
- How do we integrate information from different senses?
- How do we report our mental states verbally?
- How do we access our own internal states?
- How do we focus attention?
- How do we control behaviour deliberately?

These are problems of *mechanism*. We solve them by identifying the neural circuits, computational processes, and functional organisation that produce the relevant behaviours. Progress is steady. We understand more each decade.

The hard problem is different in kind. Even if we solved every easy problem—even if we had a complete neural blueprint of the human brain, a perfect computational model of information processing, a full account of attention, memory, and motor control—we would still face the question: why is any of this *experienced*?

Why doesn't all this information processing happen "in the dark," without any subjective quality? Why isn't the brain a sophisticated machine that processes inputs and generates outputs but experiences nothing at all?

## The Explanatory Gap

Philosopher Joseph Levine coined the term "explanatory gap" to capture what's missing from physical explanations of consciousness.

Consider a paradigm physical explanation: water is H₂O. Once you know the molecular structure of water, you can explain its properties—why it boils at 100°C, why it's liquid at room temperature, why it expands when it freezes. The explanation is satisfying. Given the molecular facts, the macroscopic properties follow.

Now consider: pain is C-fiber firing (or some other neural state). Does this explain why pain *hurts*? Does the neural description tell you what pain is *like*? It seems not. Even with perfect knowledge of C-fiber dynamics, you would not know the felt quality of pain—the burning, throbbing, aching character that makes pain what it is.

The identity statement might be true. Pain might *be* C-fiber firing in some metaphysical sense. But the identity doesn't *explain*. It leaves us wondering: why does C-fiber firing feel like *that*? Why does it feel like *anything*?

This gap is not merely a current limitation. It seems structural—a consequence of what physical explanations *are*. Physics describes structure, function, and dynamics. It tells us how parts relate, how systems evolve, what causes what. But the qualitative character of experience—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain—seems to be a different kind of thing entirely.

## The Zombie Thought Experiment

Chalmers sharpened this intuition with the philosophical zombie argument.

A philosophical zombie is a hypothetical being physically identical to you—same atoms, same brain states, same functional organisation—but lacking all subjective experience. The zombie behaves exactly as you do. It says "I'm conscious" when asked, recoils from pain, reports seeing red. But inside, there's nothing. No experience. No "something it is like" to be the zombie.

The argument runs:

1. Zombies are conceivable—we can coherently imagine a physically identical world without consciousness
2. If conceivable, then metaphysically possible
3. If possible, then consciousness is not entailed by physical facts
4. If not entailed by physical facts, then physicalism is false

The crucial move is from conceivability to possibility. Physicalists often attack this step. Perhaps zombies *seem* conceivable but harbour hidden contradictions, like a round square that seems imaginable until you think carefully.

But there's an asymmetry here. With other a posteriori identities—water and H₂O, heat and molecular motion—the appearance of contingency reflects our ignorance. We didn't *know* water's microstructure, so we could imagine water without hydrogen and oxygen. But we do know consciousness from the inside. We have direct epistemic access to what experience is. When we conceive of zombies, we're not filling in gaps in our knowledge; we're positively envisioning a scenario where all the physics is present and experience is absent.

If the zombie world is genuinely conceivable, then the physical facts don't necessitate the phenomenal facts. Consciousness is something *extra*—something over and above the physics.

## What Mary Learned

Frank Jackson's knowledge argument offers another angle on the same problem.

Mary is a brilliant neuroscientist who knows everything physical about colour vision. She understands wavelengths, photoreceptors, neural pathways, colour processing in visual cortex—the complete physical story. But Mary has spent her entire life in a black-and-white room. She has never seen colour.

When Mary finally leaves the room and sees red for the first time, does she learn something new?

Intuitively, yes. She learns what red *looks like*. She gains knowledge she couldn't have had before, no matter how complete her physical information.

If Mary learns something new, then her previous knowledge—complete physical knowledge—was not complete *simpliciter*. There was a fact about experience she didn't know. That fact is not a physical fact. Therefore, physicalism is incomplete.

Critics have responded: perhaps Mary gains a new *ability* (to recognise red, to imagine it) rather than new *knowledge*. Perhaps she gains *acquaintance* with redness without learning new propositions. The debate continues, but the intuitive force of the argument remains: knowing everything about the mechanism of colour vision seems to leave out knowing what colour experience is *like*.

## Responses to the Hard Problem

### Epiphenomenalism

[[epiphenomenalism|Epiphenomenalism]] represents an unexpected response to the hard problem: accept it completely, then minimize its consequences.

Epiphenomenalists agree that consciousness is real, non-physical, and not reducible to mechanism. They accept the explanatory gap. What they deny is that any of this matters causally. Consciousness, on this view, is steam rising from a locomotive—produced by the engine but doing nothing to move the train.

This might seem like a cop-out, but it has a serious motivation: the apparent causal closure of physics. If every physical event has a sufficient physical cause, where would consciousness enter the causal chain? Epiphenomenalists conclude it doesn't—the physical world runs on its own, and consciousness merely accompanies certain physical states.

The decisive objection, developed at length in this site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet, is that epiphenomenalism undermines itself. If consciousness is causally inert, then our reports about consciousness are caused entirely by brain states disconnected from the experiences themselves. Why should such reports be accurate? The epiphenomenalist who claims to believe their position based on reasoning about their own experience has already refuted themselves.

### Integrated Information Theory

[[integrated-information-theory|Integrated Information Theory (IIT)]] attempts to dissolve the hard problem by *identifying* consciousness with integrated information. Developed by Giulio Tononi, IIT proposes that consciousness doesn't *emerge from* or *correlate with* physical processes—it *is* a certain kind of physical structure, one characterised by high integration (measured by phi/Φ).

This is a bold move. Rather than explaining how physical processes give rise to experience, IIT claims they don't—consciousness just *is* the integrated information, and asking why feels like asking why water is H₂O. The identity is fundamental, not derived.

Does this solve the hard problem? Critics argue it merely relocates the mystery: instead of asking "why does this physical process produce experience?" we must ask "why is integrated information identical to experience?" The explanatory gap reappears at a different level. IIT asserts an identity; it doesn't explain why that identity holds.

Still, IIT represents one of the most rigorous attempts to take consciousness seriously as fundamental. Its willingness to accept counterintuitive consequences—including a form of panpsychism where any integrated system has some degree of experience—shows intellectual courage.

### Mysterianism

Some philosophers argue that the hard problem may be permanently beyond human understanding. Colin McGinn's "new mysterianism" holds that human minds are *cognitively closed* with respect to the mind-body connection—we lack and may forever lack the conceptual apparatus to understand how physical processes give rise to experience.

This is not mysticism. McGinn's position is that consciousness is a natural phenomenon with a natural explanation. The explanation exists. Other kinds of minds—perhaps alien intelligences or artificial systems with different architectures—might access it. But human cognition has evolved constraints that exclude certain conceptual territories.

This possibility aligns with [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic approaches to the unknowable]]—philosophical methods for approaching what cannot be directly grasped. If the hard problem marks a genuine cognitive limit, we may need to trace its boundaries through negation rather than expecting to solve it directly.

## Why This Matters

The hard problem is not merely an abstract puzzle for philosophers. It cuts to the heart of how we understand ourselves and our place in nature.

If physical explanation cannot reach consciousness, then the scientific worldview is incomplete in a fundamental way. We would need new concepts, new principles—perhaps consciousness as a basic feature of reality alongside mass, charge, and spacetime.

This doesn't mean abandoning science. It means recognising that the methods which work so well for explaining mechanism may not work for explaining experience. The world may contain more than mechanism. Consciousness may be irreducible—not because it's supernatural, but because reduction is the wrong tool for understanding it.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

The hard problem is the foundation of this site's [[tenets|Dualism tenet]]. The explanatory gap between physical description and subjective experience remains unbridged. No amount of neurological detail tells us *why* there is something it is like to be conscious.

This is not a claim that physics is wrong or that we should abandon neuroscience. It is a claim about what physical explanation can and cannot achieve. Mechanism explains mechanism. But experience may require a different kind of understanding—one that takes consciousness seriously as a fundamental feature of reality rather than an embarrassing residue to be explained away.

The site's tenets explore what follows if we take the hard problem seriously. If consciousness is not reducible to physics, how might mind and matter interact? The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] and [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenets sketch one possibility: consciousness influences physical outcomes at the quantum level, where physics leaves room for undetermined events.

Whether this specific proposal is correct matters less than the underlying point: the hard problem demands that we keep our ontology open. Simplicity (the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet) is not a reliable guide when we face phenomena we barely understand. The apparent simplicity of physicalism may reflect ignorance rather than insight.

## Further Reading

### On This Site
- [[materialism|Against Materialism]] — Why physicalist explanations fail
- [[qualia]] — The qualitative character of experience
- [[epiphenomenalism]] — The view that consciousness is causally inert
- [[functionalism]] — The view that mental states are functional roles
- [[integrated-information-theory]] — A mathematical theory identifying consciousness with integrated information
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — How quantum mechanics might relate to consciousness
- [[apophatic-approaches]] — Methods for approaching what may exceed human understanding
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments of this site

### External Resources
- [Consciousness (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness/) — Comprehensive overview of consciousness in philosophy
- [Qualia (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qualia/) — Detailed treatment of the qualitative aspects of experience
- David Chalmers, "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" (1995) — The paper that named the hard problem
- Thomas Nagel, "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" (1974) — Classic argument for the irreducibility of subjective experience
- Frank Jackson, "Epiphenomenal Qualia" (1982) — The Mary's Room thought experiment

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32(127), 127-136.
- Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. *Pacific Philosophical Quarterly*, 64, 354-361.
- McGinn, C. (1989). Can we solve the mind-body problem? *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? *Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - hard-problem.md with apophatic-approaches article
Task: Cross-review hard-problem.md considering apophatic-approaches insights
Session: 20

obsidian/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness.md, after:

---
title: "The Hard Problem of Consciousness"
created: 2026-01-06
modified: 2026-01-13
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-13T19:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[integrated-information-theory]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-06
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-01-10T15:30:00+00:00
---

Why is there something it is like to be you?

This question—deceptively simple—marks the boundary where physical explanation seems to end and mystery begins. Neuroscience can trace the cascade of neural activity when you see red, taste coffee, or feel pain. It can explain how you discriminate stimuli, report your states, and control your behaviour. Yet after all this explanation, a question remains: why is any of this accompanied by *experience*?

David Chalmers called this the "hard problem of consciousness." It is hard not because we lack data or technology, but because the very structure of physical explanation seems incapable of reaching it.

## Easy Problems and Hard Problems

Chalmers distinguishes the hard problem from what he calls the "easy problems" of consciousness—easy not because they're simple, but because we know what a solution would look like. The easy problems include:

- How do we discriminate sensory stimuli and react appropriately?
- How do we integrate information from different senses?
- How do we report our mental states verbally?
- How do we access our own internal states?
- How do we focus attention?
- How do we control behaviour deliberately?

These are problems of *mechanism*. We solve them by identifying the neural circuits, computational processes, and functional organisation that produce the relevant behaviours. Progress is steady. We understand more each decade.

The hard problem is different in kind. Even if we solved every easy problem—even if we had a complete neural blueprint of the human brain, a perfect computational model of information processing, a full account of attention, memory, and motor control—we would still face the question: why is any of this *experienced*?

Why doesn't all this information processing happen "in the dark," without any subjective quality? Why isn't the brain a sophisticated machine that processes inputs and generates outputs but experiences nothing at all?

## The Explanatory Gap

Philosopher Joseph Levine coined the term "explanatory gap" to capture what's missing from physical explanations of consciousness.

Consider a paradigm physical explanation: water is H₂O. Once you know the molecular structure of water, you can explain its properties—why it boils at 100°C, why it's liquid at room temperature, why it expands when it freezes. The explanation is satisfying. Given the molecular facts, the macroscopic properties follow.

Now consider: pain is C-fiber firing (or some other neural state). Does this explain why pain *hurts*? Does the neural description tell you what pain is *like*? It seems not. Even with perfect knowledge of C-fiber dynamics, you would not know the felt quality of pain—the burning, throbbing, aching character that makes pain what it is.

The identity statement might be true. Pain might *be* C-fiber firing in some metaphysical sense. But the identity doesn't *explain*. It leaves us wondering: why does C-fiber firing feel like *that*? Why does it feel like *anything*?

This gap is not merely a current limitation. It seems structural—a consequence of what physical explanations *are*. Physics describes structure, function, and dynamics. It tells us how parts relate, how systems evolve, what causes what. But the qualitative character of experience—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain—seems to be a different kind of thing entirely.

## The Zombie Thought Experiment

Chalmers sharpened this intuition with the philosophical zombie argument.

A philosophical zombie is a hypothetical being physically identical to you—same atoms, same brain states, same functional organisation—but lacking all subjective experience. The zombie behaves exactly as you do. It says "I'm conscious" when asked, recoils from pain, reports seeing red. But inside, there's nothing. No experience. No "something it is like" to be the zombie.

The argument runs:

1. Zombies are conceivable—we can coherently imagine a physically identical world without consciousness
2. If conceivable, then metaphysically possible
3. If possible, then consciousness is not entailed by physical facts
4. If not entailed by physical facts, then physicalism is false

The crucial move is from conceivability to possibility. Physicalists often attack this step. Perhaps zombies *seem* conceivable but harbour hidden contradictions, like a round square that seems imaginable until you think carefully.

But there's an asymmetry here. With other a posteriori identities—water and H₂O, heat and molecular motion—the appearance of contingency reflects our ignorance. We didn't *know* water's microstructure, so we could imagine water without hydrogen and oxygen. But we do know consciousness from the inside. We have direct epistemic access to what experience is. When we conceive of zombies, we're not filling in gaps in our knowledge; we're positively envisioning a scenario where all the physics is present and experience is absent.

If the zombie world is genuinely conceivable, then the physical facts don't necessitate the phenomenal facts. Consciousness is something *extra*—something over and above the physics.

## What Mary Learned

Frank Jackson's knowledge argument offers another angle on the same problem.

Mary is a brilliant neuroscientist who knows everything physical about colour vision. She understands wavelengths, photoreceptors, neural pathways, colour processing in visual cortex—the complete physical story. But Mary has spent her entire life in a black-and-white room. She has never seen colour.

When Mary finally leaves the room and sees red for the first time, does she learn something new?

Intuitively, yes. She learns what red *looks like*. She gains knowledge she couldn't have had before, no matter how complete her physical information.

If Mary learns something new, then her previous knowledge—complete physical knowledge—was not complete *simpliciter*. There was a fact about experience she didn't know. That fact is not a physical fact. Therefore, physicalism is incomplete.

Critics have responded: perhaps Mary gains a new *ability* (to recognise red, to imagine it) rather than new *knowledge*. Perhaps she gains *acquaintance* with redness without learning new propositions. The debate continues, but the intuitive force of the argument remains: knowing everything about the mechanism of colour vision seems to leave out knowing what colour experience is *like*.

## Responses to the Hard Problem

### Epiphenomenalism

[[epiphenomenalism|Epiphenomenalism]] represents an unexpected response to the hard problem: accept it completely, then minimize its consequences.

Epiphenomenalists agree that consciousness is real, non-physical, and not reducible to mechanism. They accept the explanatory gap. What they deny is that any of this matters causally. Consciousness, on this view, is steam rising from a locomotive—produced by the engine but doing nothing to move the train.

This might seem like a cop-out, but it has a serious motivation: the apparent causal closure of physics. If every physical event has a sufficient physical cause, where would consciousness enter the causal chain? Epiphenomenalists conclude it doesn't—the physical world runs on its own, and consciousness merely accompanies certain physical states.

The decisive objection, developed at length in this site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet, is that epiphenomenalism undermines itself. If consciousness is causally inert, then our reports about consciousness are caused entirely by brain states disconnected from the experiences themselves. Why should such reports be accurate? The epiphenomenalist who claims to believe their position based on reasoning about their own experience has already refuted themselves.

### Integrated Information Theory

[[integrated-information-theory|Integrated Information Theory (IIT)]] attempts to dissolve the hard problem by *identifying* consciousness with integrated information. Developed by Giulio Tononi, IIT proposes that consciousness doesn't *emerge from* or *correlate with* physical processes—it *is* a certain kind of physical structure, one characterised by high integration (measured by phi/Φ).

This is a bold move. Rather than explaining how physical processes give rise to experience, IIT claims they don't—consciousness just *is* the integrated information, and asking why feels like asking why water is H₂O. The identity is fundamental, not derived.

Does this solve the hard problem? Critics argue it merely relocates the mystery: instead of asking "why does this physical process produce experience?" we must ask "why is integrated information identical to experience?" The explanatory gap reappears at a different level. IIT asserts an identity; it doesn't explain why that identity holds.

Still, IIT represents one of the most rigorous attempts to take consciousness seriously as fundamental. Its willingness to accept counterintuitive consequences—including a form of panpsychism where any integrated system has some degree of experience—shows intellectual courage.

### Mysterianism

Some philosophers argue that the hard problem may be permanently beyond human understanding. Colin McGinn's "new mysterianism" holds that human minds are *cognitively closed* with respect to the mind-body connection—we lack and may forever lack the conceptual apparatus to understand how physical processes give rise to experience.

This is not mysticism. McGinn's position is that consciousness is a natural phenomenon with a natural explanation. The explanation exists. Other kinds of minds—perhaps alien intelligences or artificial systems with different architectures—might access it. But human cognition has evolved constraints that exclude certain conceptual territories.

This possibility aligns with [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic approaches to the unknowable]]—philosophical methods for approaching what cannot be directly grasped. If the hard problem marks a genuine cognitive limit, we may need to trace its boundaries through negation rather than expecting to solve it directly.

### The Apophatic Alternative

Rather than treating the hard problem as a puzzle awaiting solution, we might approach it through what Nicholas of Cusa called *docta ignorantia*—learned ignorance. The explanatory gap is not merely a failure; it reveals the *shape* of consciousness through what physical description excludes.

Consider: we can systematically identify what consciousness is *not*. It is not identical to neural activity (identity fails the explanatory gap). It is not an illusion (eliminativism cannot coherently deny what it presupposes). It is not functional organisation alone (functionalism cannot account for qualia). Each negation rules out territory, gradually outlining what remains.

This approach does not dissolve the hard problem but transforms it. The question shifts from "how do physical processes produce experience?" to "what does the systematic failure of physical explanation reveal about what consciousness is?" The gap becomes informative rather than merely frustrating—a boundary that shows us something about the nature of what lies beyond.

## Why This Matters

The hard problem is not merely an abstract puzzle for philosophers. It cuts to the heart of how we understand ourselves and our place in nature.

If physical explanation cannot reach consciousness, then the scientific worldview is incomplete in a fundamental way. We would need new concepts, new principles—perhaps consciousness as a basic feature of reality alongside mass, charge, and spacetime.

This doesn't mean abandoning science. It means recognising that the methods which work so well for explaining mechanism may not work for explaining experience. The world may contain more than mechanism. Consciousness may be irreducible—not because it's supernatural, but because reduction is the wrong tool for understanding it.

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

The hard problem is the foundation of this site's [[tenets|Dualism tenet]]. The explanatory gap between physical description and subjective experience remains unbridged. No amount of neurological detail tells us *why* there is something it is like to be conscious.

This is not a claim that physics is wrong or that we should abandon neuroscience. It is a claim about what physical explanation can and cannot achieve. Mechanism explains mechanism. But experience may require a different kind of understanding—one that takes consciousness seriously as a fundamental feature of reality rather than an embarrassing residue to be explained away.

The site's tenets explore what follows if we take the hard problem seriously. If consciousness is not reducible to physics, how might mind and matter interact? The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] and [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenets sketch one possibility: consciousness influences physical outcomes at the quantum level, where physics leaves room for undetermined events.

Whether this specific proposal is correct matters less than the underlying point: the hard problem demands that we keep our ontology open. Simplicity (the [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet) is not a reliable guide when we face phenomena we barely understand. The apparent simplicity of physicalism may reflect ignorance rather than insight.

## Further Reading

### On This Site
- [[materialism|Against Materialism]] — Why physicalist explanations fail
- [[qualia]] — The qualitative character of experience
- [[epiphenomenalism]] — The view that consciousness is causally inert
- [[functionalism]] — The view that mental states are functional roles
- [[integrated-information-theory]] — A mathematical theory identifying consciousness with integrated information
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — How quantum mechanics might relate to consciousness
- [[apophatic-approaches]] — Methods for approaching what may exceed human understanding
- [[tenets]] — The foundational commitments of this site

### External Resources
- [Consciousness (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness/) — Comprehensive overview of consciousness in philosophy
- [Qualia (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qualia/) — Detailed treatment of the qualitative aspects of experience
- David Chalmers, "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" (1995) — The paper that named the hard problem
- Thomas Nagel, "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" (1974) — Classic argument for the irreducibility of subjective experience
- Frank Jackson, "Epiphenomenal Qualia" (1982) — The Mary's Room thought experiment

## References

- Chalmers, D. J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219.
- Chalmers, D. J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32(127), 127-136.
- Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and qualia: The explanatory gap. *Pacific Philosophical Quarterly*, 64, 354-361.
- McGinn, C. (1989). Can we solve the mind-body problem? *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? *Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.
