obsidian/topics/mysterianism-cognitive-closure.md, before:

---
title: "Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure"
created: 2026-01-23
modified: 2026-01-25
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-25T14:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[dualism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-23
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-01-25T14:30:00+00:00
---

Human minds may be constitutionally incapable of solving the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem of consciousness]]—not because consciousness is supernatural, but because our cognitive architecture lacks the conceptual tools. This position, called **mysterianism** or "new mysterianism," argues that certain problems may be permanently closed to minds like ours, just as calculus is closed to rats or quantum field theory is closed to chimpanzees. Colin McGinn formalized this view in 1989 through the concept of **cognitive closure**: the idea that particular properties can be inaccessible to particular cognitive systems, regardless of effort or time.

Mysterianism occupies unusual philosophical territory. Unlike [[materialism|materialists]], mysterians take [[phenomenal-consciousness|phenomenal consciousness]] seriously as something real that demands explanation. Unlike dualists, they remain officially neutral on whether consciousness is physical or non-physical. Their claim is epistemological rather than ontological: we cannot know the answer because the answer—whatever it is—lies beyond our conceptual reach.

## McGinn's Cognitive Closure Thesis

Colin McGinn's 1989 paper "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" introduced the formal definition: "A type of mind M is cognitively closed with respect to a property P if and only if the concept-forming procedures at M's disposal cannot extend to a grasp of P."

The core argument proceeds by analogy. Rats cannot do calculus—not because they lack time or motivation, but because they lack the cognitive modules required for mathematical abstraction. Monkeys cannot understand quantum mechanics. These aren't temporary limitations awaiting better rat education; they're structural features of rat and monkey minds. McGinn argues humans face similar closure with respect to consciousness.

**The access problem.** We access consciousness through [[introspection]] and access the brain through perception (including scientific instruments). Neither mode of access reveals the link between them. Introspection shows us [[qualia]]—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain—but not how neural firing produces these experiences. Neuroscience shows us correlates—activity in V4 when seeing red—but not why there's something it's like to have that activity. The property "P" that explains the connection may require a mode of access we simply don't have.

McGinn calls this position **Transcendental Naturalism**: consciousness is fully natural, the solution is written in our genes and neural architecture, yet our concept-forming faculties cannot grasp it. The mystery isn't supernatural—it's our cognitive limits that are the problem.

## The Squirrel and Quantum Mechanics

The squirrel attempting quantum field theory is a useful analogy. We can imagine placing a squirrel in a physics library for a thousand years. It would never solve the Schrödinger equation—not because the equation is supernatural, not because squirrels lack diligence, but because squirrel minds lack the cognitive modules for mathematical physics.

Now consider: might humans be squirrels relative to consciousness? We have sophisticated language, science, philosophy, yet all our efforts have not bridged the [[explanatory-gap]]. The [[knowledge-argument]] (Mary's Room) and [[philosophical-zombies|zombie arguments]] remain contested—materialists offer responses that some find satisfying—but the persistence of debate is itself significant. Perhaps this persistent difficulty indicates not merely that the problem is hard but that it's the wrong *kind* of problem for minds like ours.

**The tool-extension objection.** Critics note that squirrels have no extensible cognitive tools, but humans do: mathematics, scientific instruments, computers. We transcend biological limits through technology. Why assume consciousness is different? McGinn's response is twofold. First, all our tools ultimately produce outputs for human understanding—we still need to *grasp* the solution, and if property P lies outside our conceptual reach, no tool can help us grasp it. Second, four centuries of tool-assisted inquiry have not closed the explanatory gap—if anything, neuroscience has sharpened it by revealing the gulf between neural activity and experience.

The critical question: can we identify which problems are permanently closed versus temporarily difficult? McGinn's answer is pessimistic. We cannot, from inside our cognitive limitations, determine their boundaries. The squirrel cannot recognize what it's missing. We might be in the same position.

## Nagel's Conceptual Gap

Thomas Nagel's 1974 paper "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" anticipated mysterianism without fully embracing it. Nagel argued that bat echolocation provides experiences utterly unlike anything humans can imagine. We can describe the physics of sonar, map the neural correlates, yet we cannot grasp what it's *like* to perceive via echolocation.

This reveals a structural problem. Objective scientific methods work by abstracting away from particular viewpoints. But consciousness *is* viewpoint—it's the "what it's like" that defines it. To understand consciousness objectively, we would need to remove the subjective character. Yet that's precisely what we're trying to explain.

Nagel doesn't commit to permanent closure. He suggests a "conceptual revolution" might provide new concepts adequate to the task—but crucially, we cannot conceive what these concepts would be. If we could, we'd already have them. The revolution must be unimaginable from our current perspective, which raises the question: is that different from saying it's impossible?

## Temporary versus Permanent Mysterianism

An important distinction emerges in the literature:

**Temporary mysterianism** holds that current science cannot explain consciousness, but future paradigm shifts might close the gap. This is methodological caution, not philosophical pessimism. Many phenomena once seemed mysterious—life, heredity, computation—and science eventually explained them.

**Permanent mysterianism** (cognitive closure proper) holds that the gap is permanent for beings with our cognitive architecture. No amount of time, effort, or paradigm shifts will help because the limitation is constitutional, not circumstantial.

The difficulty: both positions look identical from our current vantage point. We cannot distinguish "not yet solved" from "unsolvable in principle" while the problem remains unsolved. The temporary mysterian points to scientific history—problems get solved. The permanent mysterian points to the same history—except when cognitive limits prevent it, as with rats and calculus.

The Map takes no official position on which version is correct, though the [[tenets#Occam's Razor Has Limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet suggests we should not assume the problem is solvable merely because unsolved problems often get solved. The persistence and *kind* of difficulty matters. Ordinary hard problems yield incrementally to investigation. The hard problem of consciousness has not budged despite centuries of attention.

## Objections and Responses

**The defeatism objection.** Critics like Daniel Dennett and the Churchlands argue that mysterianism encourages premature surrender. We cannot know in advance which problems are unsolvable. Better to keep investigating than declare defeat.

McGinn's response: acknowledging limits isn't defeatism, it's intellectual honesty. We don't call it "defeatist" when we accept that dogs can't do topology. Why is recognizing human limits different? Moreover, the mysterian position doesn't recommend stopping research—it predicts that research, however extensive, won't solve *this particular* problem.

**What would falsify mysterianism?** Permanent mysterianism makes a strong claim: no future conceptual breakthrough will close the explanatory gap. If neuroscience, philosophy, or some unforeseeable discipline eventually explains *why* neural activity produces experience—not just correlates it—mysterianism is refuted. The position is falsifiable; it simply predicts (perhaps correctly) that this refutation will never occur.

**The historical progress objection.** Vitalism once claimed life required a special "vital force" beyond chemistry. Neuroscience proved vitalism wrong by explaining life mechanistically. Won't consciousness be similar?

The mysterian reply: vitalism failed because it made bad predictions. It claimed life violated chemistry; chemistry proved it wrong. Mysterianism makes no such empirical claims. It's a thesis about cognitive access, not about what exists. The solution to consciousness could be entirely physical—we'd still be closed to grasping it if our concept-forming procedures don't extend that far.

**The conceivability objection.** Unlike rats facing calculus, we can at least *conceive* of a solution to consciousness. We can imagine bridging the [[explanatory-gap]], even if we don't know how. Doesn't this suggest the problem is difficult rather than closed?

McGinn distinguishes conceiving *that* there's a solution from conceiving *what* the solution is. We can accept on third-person grounds (analogy to other problems, theoretical parsimony) that a solution exists. But this isn't the same as grasping property "P" itself. The rat might believe on testimony that calculus exists without being able to do calculus.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Mysterianism aligns strongly with the Map's [[tenets#Occam's Razor Has Limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]]. McGinn's central insight is that our sense of what's "simple" or "solvable" may be cognitively bounded. When [[materialism]] appears simpler than [[dualism]], this might reflect our conceptual limitations rather than ontological truth. We're like the squirrel for whom "particles in space" is simpler than quantum field theory—simpler because we can grasp it, not because it's actually correct.

The Map goes beyond mysterianism in two key ways. First, where McGinn remains officially neutral on the mind-body problem, the Map commits to [[dualism]]—consciousness is irreducible whether or not we can explain the connection. Second, where mysterianism is purely epistemological (about knowledge), the Map makes the stronger ontological claim through the [[tenets#Bidirectional Interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]]: consciousness causally influences the physical world. This requires a mechanism, which the Map proposes via [[quantum-consciousness|quantum selection]].

Yet mysterianism remains compatible with the Map's framework. One could accept that consciousness is dualist and causally efficacious while acknowledging we may never fully understand *how* the interaction works. The property "P" that mediates mind-matter causation might be permanently closed to us, even as we correctly infer its existence from phenomenology and reasoning.

**Connection to [[voids]].** The Map's concept of voids—cognitive gaps, unchartable territories, boundaries of thought—resonates deeply with cognitive closure. McGinn's property "P" might lie in void territory: something that exists but remains structurally inaccessible to human cognition. The difference is one of emphasis. Mysterianism suggests we cannot even identify what we're missing. The voids framework suggests we can map the *edges* of void territory through [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic methods]]—saying what consciousness is *not*, even if we cannot say what it *is*. The phenomenology of [[thoughts-that-slip-away|slippage]]—insights that dissolve upon grasping—may mark the boundary between chartable and unchartable territory.

Mysterianism thus represents an intellectually honest position that takes consciousness seriously without claiming to solve it. Whether cognitive closure is temporary (as optimists hope) or permanent (as McGinn argues) remains unknowable from our current position. But the acknowledgment that human cognition has limits—that there may be truths we cannot grasp—challenges the hubris that often accompanies scientific confidence.

The Map accepts this humility about our cognitive reach while still making commitments about what consciousness *is* and what it *does*. We can know that consciousness is irreducible and causally efficacious even if we cannot fully explain the mechanism. Phenomenology provides direct evidence; reasoning from that evidence supports the tenets. Cognitive closure about the details doesn't prevent philosophical conclusions about the essentials.

## Further Reading

- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] - The problem mysterians claim may be unsolvable
- [[explanatory-gap]] - The conceptual gap between physical processes and conscious experience
- [[voids]] - The Map's framework for cognitive limits and unchartable territories
- [[tenets#Occam's Razor Has Limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] - Why simplicity is an unreliable guide

## References

- McGinn, C. (1989). Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem? *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- McGinn, C. (1993). *Problems in Philosophy: The Limits of Inquiry*. Blackwell.
- McGinn, C. (1999). *The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World*. Basic Books.
- Nagel, T. (1974). What Is It Like to Be a Bat? *Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.
- Dennett, D. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
- Flanagan, O. (1991). *The Science of the Mind*. MIT Press.
- Kriegel, U. (2003). The New Mysterianism and the Thesis of Cognitive Closure. *Acta Analytica*, 18, 177-191.
- Chalmers, D. (1995). Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219.

Commit message:

feat(seo): add meta descriptions to all content files
Add description frontmatter field to 183 content files for SEO and
social sharing: 5 apex articles, 34 topics, 144 concepts. Descriptions
are 150-160 characters summarizing each article's key thesis.

obsidian/topics/mysterianism-cognitive-closure.md, after:

---
title: "Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure"
description: "Are humans cognitively closed to consciousness? Like squirrels and calculus, some problems may be structurally beyond minds like ours to solve."
created: 2026-01-23
modified: 2026-01-25
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-26T22:15:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[explanatory-gap]]"
concepts:
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
  - "[[dualism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-23
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-01-25T14:30:00+00:00
---

Human minds may be constitutionally incapable of solving the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem of consciousness]]—not because consciousness is supernatural, but because our cognitive architecture lacks the conceptual tools. This position, called **mysterianism** or "new mysterianism," argues that certain problems may be permanently closed to minds like ours, just as calculus is closed to rats or quantum field theory is closed to chimpanzees. Colin McGinn formalized this view in 1989 through the concept of **cognitive closure**: the idea that particular properties can be inaccessible to particular cognitive systems, regardless of effort or time.

Mysterianism occupies unusual philosophical territory. Unlike [[materialism|materialists]], mysterians take [[phenomenal-consciousness|phenomenal consciousness]] seriously as something real that demands explanation. Unlike dualists, they remain officially neutral on whether consciousness is physical or non-physical. Their claim is epistemological rather than ontological: we cannot know the answer because the answer—whatever it is—lies beyond our conceptual reach.

## McGinn's Cognitive Closure Thesis

Colin McGinn's 1989 paper "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" introduced the formal definition: "A type of mind M is cognitively closed with respect to a property P if and only if the concept-forming procedures at M's disposal cannot extend to a grasp of P."

The core argument proceeds by analogy. Rats cannot do calculus—not because they lack time or motivation, but because they lack the cognitive modules required for mathematical abstraction. Monkeys cannot understand quantum mechanics. These aren't temporary limitations awaiting better rat education; they're structural features of rat and monkey minds. McGinn argues humans face similar closure with respect to consciousness.

**The access problem.** We access consciousness through [[introspection]] and access the brain through perception (including scientific instruments). Neither mode of access reveals the link between them. Introspection shows us [[qualia]]—the redness of red, the painfulness of pain—but not how neural firing produces these experiences. Neuroscience shows us correlates—activity in V4 when seeing red—but not why there's something it's like to have that activity. The property "P" that explains the connection may require a mode of access we simply don't have.

McGinn calls this position **Transcendental Naturalism**: consciousness is fully natural, the solution is written in our genes and neural architecture, yet our concept-forming faculties cannot grasp it. The mystery isn't supernatural—it's our cognitive limits that are the problem.

## The Squirrel and Quantum Mechanics

The squirrel attempting quantum field theory is a useful analogy. We can imagine placing a squirrel in a physics library for a thousand years. It would never solve the Schrödinger equation—not because the equation is supernatural, not because squirrels lack diligence, but because squirrel minds lack the cognitive modules for mathematical physics.

Now consider: might humans be squirrels relative to consciousness? We have sophisticated language, science, philosophy, yet all our efforts have not bridged the [[explanatory-gap]]. The [[knowledge-argument]] (Mary's Room) and [[philosophical-zombies|zombie arguments]] remain contested—materialists offer responses that some find satisfying—but the persistence of debate is itself significant. Perhaps this persistent difficulty indicates not merely that the problem is hard but that it's the wrong *kind* of problem for minds like ours.

**The tool-extension objection.** Critics note that squirrels have no extensible cognitive tools, but humans do: mathematics, scientific instruments, computers. We transcend biological limits through technology. Why assume consciousness is different? McGinn's response is twofold. First, all our tools ultimately produce outputs for human understanding—we still need to *grasp* the solution, and if property P lies outside our conceptual reach, no tool can help us grasp it. Second, four centuries of tool-assisted inquiry have not closed the explanatory gap—if anything, neuroscience has sharpened it by revealing the gulf between neural activity and experience.

The critical question: can we identify which problems are permanently closed versus temporarily difficult? McGinn's answer is pessimistic. We cannot, from inside our cognitive limitations, determine their boundaries. The squirrel cannot recognize what it's missing. We might be in the same position.

## Nagel's Conceptual Gap

Thomas Nagel's 1974 paper "What Is It Like to Be a Bat?" anticipated mysterianism without fully embracing it. Nagel argued that bat echolocation provides experiences utterly unlike anything humans can imagine. We can describe the physics of sonar, map the neural correlates, yet we cannot grasp what it's *like* to perceive via echolocation.

This reveals a structural problem. Objective scientific methods work by abstracting away from particular viewpoints. But consciousness *is* viewpoint—it's the "what it's like" that defines it. To understand consciousness objectively, we would need to remove the subjective character. Yet that's precisely what we're trying to explain.

Nagel doesn't commit to permanent closure. He suggests a "conceptual revolution" might provide new concepts adequate to the task—but crucially, we cannot conceive what these concepts would be. If we could, we'd already have them. The revolution must be unimaginable from our current perspective, which raises the question: is that different from saying it's impossible?

## Temporary versus Permanent Mysterianism

An important distinction emerges in the literature:

**Temporary mysterianism** holds that current science cannot explain consciousness, but future paradigm shifts might close the gap. This is methodological caution, not philosophical pessimism. Many phenomena once seemed mysterious—life, heredity, computation—and science eventually explained them.

**Permanent mysterianism** (cognitive closure proper) holds that the gap is permanent for beings with our cognitive architecture. No amount of time, effort, or paradigm shifts will help because the limitation is constitutional, not circumstantial.

The difficulty: both positions look identical from our current vantage point. We cannot distinguish "not yet solved" from "unsolvable in principle" while the problem remains unsolved. The temporary mysterian points to scientific history—problems get solved. The permanent mysterian points to the same history—except when cognitive limits prevent it, as with rats and calculus.

The Map takes no official position on which version is correct, though the [[tenets#Occam's Razor Has Limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet suggests we should not assume the problem is solvable merely because unsolved problems often get solved. The persistence and *kind* of difficulty matters. Ordinary hard problems yield incrementally to investigation. The hard problem of consciousness has not budged despite centuries of attention.

## Objections and Responses

**The defeatism objection.** Critics like Daniel Dennett and the Churchlands argue that mysterianism encourages premature surrender. We cannot know in advance which problems are unsolvable. Better to keep investigating than declare defeat.

McGinn's response: acknowledging limits isn't defeatism, it's intellectual honesty. We don't call it "defeatist" when we accept that dogs can't do topology. Why is recognizing human limits different? Moreover, the mysterian position doesn't recommend stopping research—it predicts that research, however extensive, won't solve *this particular* problem.

**What would falsify mysterianism?** Permanent mysterianism makes a strong claim: no future conceptual breakthrough will close the explanatory gap. If neuroscience, philosophy, or some unforeseeable discipline eventually explains *why* neural activity produces experience—not just correlates it—mysterianism is refuted. The position is falsifiable; it simply predicts (perhaps correctly) that this refutation will never occur.

**The historical progress objection.** Vitalism once claimed life required a special "vital force" beyond chemistry. Neuroscience proved vitalism wrong by explaining life mechanistically. Won't consciousness be similar?

The mysterian reply: vitalism failed because it made bad predictions. It claimed life violated chemistry; chemistry proved it wrong. Mysterianism makes no such empirical claims. It's a thesis about cognitive access, not about what exists. The solution to consciousness could be entirely physical—we'd still be closed to grasping it if our concept-forming procedures don't extend that far.

**The conceivability objection.** Unlike rats facing calculus, we can at least *conceive* of a solution to consciousness. We can imagine bridging the [[explanatory-gap]], even if we don't know how. Doesn't this suggest the problem is difficult rather than closed?

McGinn distinguishes conceiving *that* there's a solution from conceiving *what* the solution is. We can accept on third-person grounds (analogy to other problems, theoretical parsimony) that a solution exists. But this isn't the same as grasping property "P" itself. The rat might believe on testimony that calculus exists without being able to do calculus.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Mysterianism aligns strongly with the Map's [[tenets#Occam's Razor Has Limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]]. McGinn's central insight is that our sense of what's "simple" or "solvable" may be cognitively bounded. When [[materialism]] appears simpler than [[dualism]], this might reflect our conceptual limitations rather than ontological truth. We're like the squirrel for whom "particles in space" is simpler than quantum field theory—simpler because we can grasp it, not because it's actually correct.

The Map goes beyond mysterianism in two key ways. First, where McGinn remains officially neutral on the mind-body problem, the Map commits to [[dualism]]—consciousness is irreducible whether or not we can explain the connection. Second, where mysterianism is purely epistemological (about knowledge), the Map makes the stronger ontological claim through the [[tenets#Bidirectional Interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]]: consciousness causally influences the physical world. This requires a mechanism, which the Map proposes via [[quantum-consciousness|quantum selection]].

Yet mysterianism remains compatible with the Map's framework. One could accept that consciousness is dualist and causally efficacious while acknowledging we may never fully understand *how* the interaction works. The property "P" that mediates mind-matter causation might be permanently closed to us, even as we correctly infer its existence from phenomenology and reasoning.

**Connection to [[voids]].** The Map's concept of voids—cognitive gaps, unchartable territories, boundaries of thought—resonates deeply with cognitive closure. McGinn's property "P" might lie in void territory: something that exists but remains structurally inaccessible to human cognition. The difference is one of emphasis. Mysterianism suggests we cannot even identify what we're missing. The voids framework suggests we can map the *edges* of void territory through [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic methods]]—saying what consciousness is *not*, even if we cannot say what it *is*. The phenomenology of [[thoughts-that-slip-away|slippage]]—insights that dissolve upon grasping—may mark the boundary between chartable and unchartable territory.

Mysterianism thus represents an intellectually honest position that takes consciousness seriously without claiming to solve it. Whether cognitive closure is temporary (as optimists hope) or permanent (as McGinn argues) remains unknowable from our current position. But the acknowledgment that human cognition has limits—that there may be truths we cannot grasp—challenges the hubris that often accompanies scientific confidence.

The Map accepts this humility about our cognitive reach while still making commitments about what consciousness *is* and what it *does*. We can know that consciousness is irreducible and causally efficacious even if we cannot fully explain the mechanism. Phenomenology provides direct evidence; reasoning from that evidence supports the tenets. Cognitive closure about the details doesn't prevent philosophical conclusions about the essentials.

## Further Reading

- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]] - The problem mysterians claim may be unsolvable
- [[explanatory-gap]] - The conceptual gap between physical processes and conscious experience
- [[voids]] - The Map's framework for cognitive limits and unchartable territories
- [[tenets#Occam's Razor Has Limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] - Why simplicity is an unreliable guide

## References

- McGinn, C. (1989). Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem? *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- McGinn, C. (1993). *Problems in Philosophy: The Limits of Inquiry*. Blackwell.
- McGinn, C. (1999). *The Mysterious Flame: Conscious Minds in a Material World*. Basic Books.
- Nagel, T. (1974). What Is It Like to Be a Bat? *Philosophical Review*, 83(4), 435-450.
- Dennett, D. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
- Flanagan, O. (1991). *The Science of the Mind*. MIT Press.
- Kriegel, U. (2003). The New Mysterianism and the Thesis of Cognitive Closure. *Acta Analytica*, 18, 177-191.
- Chalmers, D. (1995). Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219.
