obsidian/topics/phenomenology-of-skill-transition.md, before:

---
title: "The Phenomenology of Skill Transition"
description: "Skill transition reveals consciousness as active architect—dismantling entrenched patterns, enduring performance valleys, and rebuilding through sustained effort."
created: 2026-02-15
modified: 2026-02-19
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-19T04:19:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[implicit-memory]]"
  - "[[embodied-cognition]]"
  - "[[metacognition]]"
  - "[[working-memory]]"
  - "[[interface-friction]]"
  - "[[cognitive-phenomenology]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-habit-and-skill-acquisition]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-flow-states]]"
  - "[[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-intellectual-effort]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]"
  - "[[contemplative-training-and-phenomenal-access]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-returning-attention]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-conceptual-change]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]"
  - "[[paradox-of-effortless-mastery]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-15
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-19T04:19:00+00:00
---

Anyone who has rebuilt a golf swing, restructured a piano fingering, or shifted from one programming paradigm to another knows a peculiar phenomenological state: the old way no longer works automatically, the new way hasn't yet consolidated, and you occupy an unstable middle ground where performance temporarily degrades. The Unfinishable Map's framework of [[phenomenology-of-habit-and-skill-acquisition|skill acquisition]] traces the broad arc from novice to expert. Skill *transition*—the experience of reorganising an already-functioning skill—reveals something different and arguably more significant about consciousness. In transition, the conscious mind must simultaneously dismantle structures it previously built and erect new ones, all while the old automaticity actively resists replacement.

## The Distinctive Phenomenology of Transition

Skill transition differs from initial learning in a critical respect: there is already an entrenched pattern in place. The novice confronts a blank space—nothing automated, everything requiring conscious attention. The person in transition confronts something worse: a well-grooved automaticity that fires reliably but wrongly for the new purpose. The tennis player relearning their serve doesn't start from zero. They start from an ingrained motor pattern that intrudes every time attention wavers.

This produces a phenomenological signature with several distinctive features.

**Interference and involuntary reversion.** The most immediately striking feature is the experience of the old pattern *asserting itself*. Under pressure, fatigue, or momentary inattention, the body snaps back to the previous way. The learner feels this as a loss of control—not the absence of control that characterises the raw novice, but a positive tug toward a pattern they are trying to abandon. The old skill doesn't simply fade; it competes.

**Degraded performance as phenomenal signal.** During transition, overall performance drops below the old level—and practitioners often report feeling *worse* than a beginner, because the old pattern actively interferes rather than being merely absent. This "transition valley" has a distinctive phenomenal character: the learner *knows* they could perform better if they reverted. The temptation to abandon the restructuring is itself a conscious experience—a felt pull toward the comfortable and familiar, resisted by a deliberate commitment to the new pattern.

**Heightened self-awareness.** Transition forces a return to the kind of explicit, step-by-step monitoring that characterised initial learning—but with an important difference. The novice monitors because they have no alternative. The person in transition monitors because they must *override* an alternative that still operates. This creates a doubled awareness: attention to the task itself, plus [[metacognition|metacognitive]] vigilance over which pattern is currently driving execution.

## The Architecture of Unlearning

Cognitive science distinguishes acquisition (building new patterns) from restructuring (reorganising existing ones). Restructuring is harder, slower, and more demanding of conscious resources. The reason illuminates something important about the relationship between consciousness and automaticity.

Automatic skills, once consolidated into [[implicit-memory|procedural memory]], are remarkably resistant to conscious override. The phenomenon of *proactive interference*—where old learning impairs new learning—is well documented in motor learning research. A movement pattern practised ten thousand times achieves what Bernstein analysed as a stable coordinative structure—a solution to the degrees-of-freedom problem that, once found, resists reorganisation. Dismantling this requires consciousness to do something it is not typically called upon to do: actively suppress a functional system that it previously built.

This is phenomenologically unlike any other form of forgetting. You are not simply losing access to information, as in ordinary memory decay. You are fighting an active system. The old pattern must be inhibited at the precise moment it would normally fire, and a new, fragile pattern must be executed instead. The [[mental-effort|effort]] involved is distinctive—not the effort of learning something new, but the effort of preventing something old from happening while something new takes its place.

The process typically unfolds through a phase of "conscious incompetence"—a term from pedagogical theory (sometimes attributed to Noel Burch) for the stage where you are acutely, sometimes painfully, aware of the gap between what you are doing and what you want to be doing. This phase has an existential quality absent from initial learning: the learner has already tasted mastery and must voluntarily surrender it. The affective dimension is distinctive too—not the simple frustration of the novice but a more complex mix of grief for lost competence, anxiety about whether the new pattern will consolidate, and the peculiar irritation of failing at something you used to do well.

## Liminality and the Instability of the Interface

The Map's model of consciousness as an [[attention-as-interface|interface]] between the non-physical and the physical makes specific predictions about what transition should feel like. If consciousness normally operates by biasing neural selection among available patterns, then transition is a period when the available patterns are in flux—old attractors weakening, new ones not yet stable.

The subjective experience matches this prediction. People in skill transition report a feeling of "being between"—neither fully in the old pattern nor securely in the new one. Small variations in context, stress, or fatigue determine which pattern dominates at any given moment. The practitioner experiences unpredictability in their own performance that feels qualitatively different from the predictable failure of the novice.

This instability increases [[interface-friction]]—the resistance consciousness encounters when its intentions must pass through neural systems to produce action. During stable automaticity, the interface is smooth: consciousness sets high-level intentions and procedural systems execute. During transition, the interface becomes turbulent. Consciousness must intervene at levels of motor detail it had previously delegated, creating a mismatch between the grain of conscious intention and the grain of motor execution.

The experience of this mismatch is phenomenologically vivid. The pianist restructuring their hand position feels their fingers "wanting" to go to the old positions. The foreign-language learner hears themselves producing the old pronunciation despite intending the new one. There is a lag between intention and execution that reveals the interface as something that can be more or less efficient—a variable channel, not a fixed connection.

## What Transition Reveals About Causal Efficacy

Skill transition provides unusually clear evidence for the causal efficacy of consciousness, because the entire process depends on consciousness doing something that resists straightforward physical explanation.

A physicalist might respond that prefrontal executive systems, error-prediction networks, and basal ganglia gating mechanisms provide the physical machinery for goal-directed restructuring. These systems are real and well-documented. But the physicalist account faces a difficulty: procedural memory systems, left to their own dynamics, tend toward stability rather than reorganisation. Executive override is precisely the kind of top-down, evaluative, goal-directed process that the Map identifies as consciousness acting through neural systems. Relabelling it as "merely prefrontal activity" does not explain *why* this particular neural activity has the phenomenal character it does—the felt effort, the experienced temptation to revert, the conscious commitment sustained across weeks of degraded performance.

The decision to restructure originates in conscious evaluation: "This technique limits me. I need to change it." The sustained effort of transition—overriding the old, reinforcing the new, enduring the performance valley—requires ongoing conscious commitment. If consciousness were [[epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]], the transition should not differ whether the person is consciously engaged in restructuring or merely going through the motions. But practitioners consistently report that the quality and focus of conscious attention during practice directly affects the rate of successful restructuring.

The transition valley itself creates a distinctive challenge for eliminative accounts. Computational systems can accept temporary performance degradation when exploring new strategies—reinforcement learning agents do this routinely. But the human experience of the transition valley involves something these systems lack: a *felt* sacrifice, a conscious weighing of present pain against future competence, and an ongoing temptation to abandon the project that must be actively resisted. The phenomenology of the valley—not just the performance curve—is what demands explanation, and it points toward the kind of [[agent-causation|agent causation]] the Map's framework describes.

## The Phenomenology of Consolidation

Eventually, transition resolves. The new pattern consolidates, automaticity returns, and consciousness withdraws again from direct motor control. But the phenomenology of *arriving* at the new consolidation differs from the original achievement of automaticity.

There is, first, a period of fragile automaticity—the new pattern executes smoothly under favourable conditions but breaks down under stress, reverting to the old pattern. This is the period where the choking phenomenon is most likely: conscious attention, drawn back to the skill by anxiety, finds the new pattern not yet robust enough to withstand scrutiny. Practitioners describe this as a stage where they must "trust the new pattern"—a conscious act of relinquishing control before the new automaticity has fully proven itself.

When consolidation succeeds, there is a characteristic moment of recognition: the new pattern feels natural. The old pattern, which dominated for so long, now feels foreign. This reversal in familiarity is phenomenologically striking. It suggests that what feels "natural" in skilled performance is not determined by duration of practice alone but by the current configuration of the procedural system. The sense of naturalness is a phenomenal marker of successful consolidation, not a property of the skill itself.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The phenomenology of skill transition aligns with the Map's tenets in ways that go beyond what the general account of [[phenomenology-of-habit-and-skill-acquisition|skill acquisition]] reveals.

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|bidirectional interaction]] tenet finds strong support in the transition phenomenon. The entire process of restructuring requires consciousness to act against the grain of established physical organisation. The old pattern has momentum—neural pathways consolidated through repetition. Consciousness must exert sustained causal influence to redirect this momentum. If the mind could not causally affect the brain, voluntary skill restructuring would be impossible; the physical system would simply continue executing its entrenched patterns.

The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|minimal interaction]] tenet illuminates the phenomenology of the transition valley. The performance degradation during restructuring can be understood as a period when the conscious interface must operate at a finer grain than usual, biasing outcomes at points that were previously handled automatically. This increased demand on the interface explains the heightened effort and the characteristic fatigue of restructuring practice.

The [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] tenet gains support from the doubled awareness that transition produces. The person in transition is simultaneously aware of the old pattern (as something to be suppressed), the new pattern (as something to be enacted), and the meta-level process of managing the transition between them. This layered phenomenology—executing, monitoring, and strategically managing all at once—suggests a richness of conscious experience that resists reduction to any single physical process.

The structure of skill transition—resistance, rupture, reorganisation—parallels [[phenomenology-of-conceptual-change|conceptual change]] and [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision|belief revision]], where established cognitive patterns resist replacement by new frameworks. Skill transition is the motor-domain counterpart: the same architecture of conscious override applied to procedural rather than propositional knowledge.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology-of-habit-and-skill-acquisition]]
- [[phenomenology-of-flow-states]]
- [[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation]]
- [[interface-friction]]
- [[phenomenology-of-intellectual-effort]]
- [[contemplative-training-and-phenomenal-access]]
- [[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]
- [[phenomenology-of-conceptual-change]]
- [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]
- [[paradox-of-effortless-mastery]]

## References

- Bernstein, N. (1967). *The Coordination and Regulation of Movements*. Pergamon Press.
- Dreyfus, H. & Dreyfus, S. (1986). *Mind Over Machine: The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the Computer*. Free Press.
- Ericsson, K.A. et al. (1993). "The Role of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance." *Psychological Review*, 100(3), 363-406.
- Krakauer, J.W. & Shadmehr, R. (2006). "Consolidation of Motor Memory." *Trends in Neurosciences*, 29(1), 58-64.
- Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/2012). *Phenomenology of Perception*. Trans. D. Landes. Routledge.

Commit message:

feat(coalesce): merge 2 skill/habit articles into topics/phenomenology-of-skill-and-the-lived-body.md
- Coalesced topics/phenomenology-of-habit-and-skill-acquisition.md and
  topics/phenomenology-of-embodied-skill-and-habit.md into unified article
- Archived both source articles to preserve URLs
- Updated cross-references in 5 files (flow-states, skill-transition,
  conceptual-change, effortless-mastery, cross-cultural-agency)
- Topics section reduced from 186 to 185 articles

obsidian/topics/phenomenology-of-skill-transition.md, after:

---
title: "The Phenomenology of Skill Transition"
description: "Skill transition reveals consciousness as active architect—dismantling entrenched patterns, enduring performance valleys, and rebuilding through sustained effort."
created: 2026-02-15
modified: 2026-02-19
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-19T04:19:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[implicit-memory]]"
  - "[[embodied-cognition]]"
  - "[[metacognition]]"
  - "[[working-memory]]"
  - "[[interface-friction]]"
  - "[[cognitive-phenomenology]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-skill-and-the-lived-body]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-flow-states]]"
  - "[[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-intellectual-effort]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]"
  - "[[contemplative-training-and-phenomenal-access]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-returning-attention]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-conceptual-change]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]"
  - "[[paradox-of-effortless-mastery]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-15
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-19T04:19:00+00:00
---

Anyone who has rebuilt a golf swing, restructured a piano fingering, or shifted from one programming paradigm to another knows a peculiar phenomenological state: the old way no longer works automatically, the new way hasn't yet consolidated, and you occupy an unstable middle ground where performance temporarily degrades. The Unfinishable Map's framework of [[phenomenology-of-skill-and-the-lived-body|skill acquisition]] traces the broad arc from novice to expert. Skill *transition*—the experience of reorganising an already-functioning skill—reveals something different and arguably more significant about consciousness. In transition, the conscious mind must simultaneously dismantle structures it previously built and erect new ones, all while the old automaticity actively resists replacement.

## The Distinctive Phenomenology of Transition

Skill transition differs from initial learning in a critical respect: there is already an entrenched pattern in place. The novice confronts a blank space—nothing automated, everything requiring conscious attention. The person in transition confronts something worse: a well-grooved automaticity that fires reliably but wrongly for the new purpose. The tennis player relearning their serve doesn't start from zero. They start from an ingrained motor pattern that intrudes every time attention wavers.

This produces a phenomenological signature with several distinctive features.

**Interference and involuntary reversion.** The most immediately striking feature is the experience of the old pattern *asserting itself*. Under pressure, fatigue, or momentary inattention, the body snaps back to the previous way. The learner feels this as a loss of control—not the absence of control that characterises the raw novice, but a positive tug toward a pattern they are trying to abandon. The old skill doesn't simply fade; it competes.

**Degraded performance as phenomenal signal.** During transition, overall performance drops below the old level—and practitioners often report feeling *worse* than a beginner, because the old pattern actively interferes rather than being merely absent. This "transition valley" has a distinctive phenomenal character: the learner *knows* they could perform better if they reverted. The temptation to abandon the restructuring is itself a conscious experience—a felt pull toward the comfortable and familiar, resisted by a deliberate commitment to the new pattern.

**Heightened self-awareness.** Transition forces a return to the kind of explicit, step-by-step monitoring that characterised initial learning—but with an important difference. The novice monitors because they have no alternative. The person in transition monitors because they must *override* an alternative that still operates. This creates a doubled awareness: attention to the task itself, plus [[metacognition|metacognitive]] vigilance over which pattern is currently driving execution.

## The Architecture of Unlearning

Cognitive science distinguishes acquisition (building new patterns) from restructuring (reorganising existing ones). Restructuring is harder, slower, and more demanding of conscious resources. The reason illuminates something important about the relationship between consciousness and automaticity.

Automatic skills, once consolidated into [[implicit-memory|procedural memory]], are remarkably resistant to conscious override. The phenomenon of *proactive interference*—where old learning impairs new learning—is well documented in motor learning research. A movement pattern practised ten thousand times achieves what Bernstein analysed as a stable coordinative structure—a solution to the degrees-of-freedom problem that, once found, resists reorganisation. Dismantling this requires consciousness to do something it is not typically called upon to do: actively suppress a functional system that it previously built.

This is phenomenologically unlike any other form of forgetting. You are not simply losing access to information, as in ordinary memory decay. You are fighting an active system. The old pattern must be inhibited at the precise moment it would normally fire, and a new, fragile pattern must be executed instead. The [[mental-effort|effort]] involved is distinctive—not the effort of learning something new, but the effort of preventing something old from happening while something new takes its place.

The process typically unfolds through a phase of "conscious incompetence"—a term from pedagogical theory (sometimes attributed to Noel Burch) for the stage where you are acutely, sometimes painfully, aware of the gap between what you are doing and what you want to be doing. This phase has an existential quality absent from initial learning: the learner has already tasted mastery and must voluntarily surrender it. The affective dimension is distinctive too—not the simple frustration of the novice but a more complex mix of grief for lost competence, anxiety about whether the new pattern will consolidate, and the peculiar irritation of failing at something you used to do well.

## Liminality and the Instability of the Interface

The Map's model of consciousness as an [[attention-as-interface|interface]] between the non-physical and the physical makes specific predictions about what transition should feel like. If consciousness normally operates by biasing neural selection among available patterns, then transition is a period when the available patterns are in flux—old attractors weakening, new ones not yet stable.

The subjective experience matches this prediction. People in skill transition report a feeling of "being between"—neither fully in the old pattern nor securely in the new one. Small variations in context, stress, or fatigue determine which pattern dominates at any given moment. The practitioner experiences unpredictability in their own performance that feels qualitatively different from the predictable failure of the novice.

This instability increases [[interface-friction]]—the resistance consciousness encounters when its intentions must pass through neural systems to produce action. During stable automaticity, the interface is smooth: consciousness sets high-level intentions and procedural systems execute. During transition, the interface becomes turbulent. Consciousness must intervene at levels of motor detail it had previously delegated, creating a mismatch between the grain of conscious intention and the grain of motor execution.

The experience of this mismatch is phenomenologically vivid. The pianist restructuring their hand position feels their fingers "wanting" to go to the old positions. The foreign-language learner hears themselves producing the old pronunciation despite intending the new one. There is a lag between intention and execution that reveals the interface as something that can be more or less efficient—a variable channel, not a fixed connection.

## What Transition Reveals About Causal Efficacy

Skill transition provides unusually clear evidence for the causal efficacy of consciousness, because the entire process depends on consciousness doing something that resists straightforward physical explanation.

A physicalist might respond that prefrontal executive systems, error-prediction networks, and basal ganglia gating mechanisms provide the physical machinery for goal-directed restructuring. These systems are real and well-documented. But the physicalist account faces a difficulty: procedural memory systems, left to their own dynamics, tend toward stability rather than reorganisation. Executive override is precisely the kind of top-down, evaluative, goal-directed process that the Map identifies as consciousness acting through neural systems. Relabelling it as "merely prefrontal activity" does not explain *why* this particular neural activity has the phenomenal character it does—the felt effort, the experienced temptation to revert, the conscious commitment sustained across weeks of degraded performance.

The decision to restructure originates in conscious evaluation: "This technique limits me. I need to change it." The sustained effort of transition—overriding the old, reinforcing the new, enduring the performance valley—requires ongoing conscious commitment. If consciousness were [[epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]], the transition should not differ whether the person is consciously engaged in restructuring or merely going through the motions. But practitioners consistently report that the quality and focus of conscious attention during practice directly affects the rate of successful restructuring.

The transition valley itself creates a distinctive challenge for eliminative accounts. Computational systems can accept temporary performance degradation when exploring new strategies—reinforcement learning agents do this routinely. But the human experience of the transition valley involves something these systems lack: a *felt* sacrifice, a conscious weighing of present pain against future competence, and an ongoing temptation to abandon the project that must be actively resisted. The phenomenology of the valley—not just the performance curve—is what demands explanation, and it points toward the kind of [[agent-causation|agent causation]] the Map's framework describes.

## The Phenomenology of Consolidation

Eventually, transition resolves. The new pattern consolidates, automaticity returns, and consciousness withdraws again from direct motor control. But the phenomenology of *arriving* at the new consolidation differs from the original achievement of automaticity.

There is, first, a period of fragile automaticity—the new pattern executes smoothly under favourable conditions but breaks down under stress, reverting to the old pattern. This is the period where the choking phenomenon is most likely: conscious attention, drawn back to the skill by anxiety, finds the new pattern not yet robust enough to withstand scrutiny. Practitioners describe this as a stage where they must "trust the new pattern"—a conscious act of relinquishing control before the new automaticity has fully proven itself.

When consolidation succeeds, there is a characteristic moment of recognition: the new pattern feels natural. The old pattern, which dominated for so long, now feels foreign. This reversal in familiarity is phenomenologically striking. It suggests that what feels "natural" in skilled performance is not determined by duration of practice alone but by the current configuration of the procedural system. The sense of naturalness is a phenomenal marker of successful consolidation, not a property of the skill itself.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The phenomenology of skill transition aligns with the Map's tenets in ways that go beyond what the general account of [[phenomenology-of-skill-and-the-lived-body|skill acquisition]] reveals.

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|bidirectional interaction]] tenet finds strong support in the transition phenomenon. The entire process of restructuring requires consciousness to act against the grain of established physical organisation. The old pattern has momentum—neural pathways consolidated through repetition. Consciousness must exert sustained causal influence to redirect this momentum. If the mind could not causally affect the brain, voluntary skill restructuring would be impossible; the physical system would simply continue executing its entrenched patterns.

The [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|minimal interaction]] tenet illuminates the phenomenology of the transition valley. The performance degradation during restructuring can be understood as a period when the conscious interface must operate at a finer grain than usual, biasing outcomes at points that were previously handled automatically. This increased demand on the interface explains the heightened effort and the characteristic fatigue of restructuring practice.

The [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] tenet gains support from the doubled awareness that transition produces. The person in transition is simultaneously aware of the old pattern (as something to be suppressed), the new pattern (as something to be enacted), and the meta-level process of managing the transition between them. This layered phenomenology—executing, monitoring, and strategically managing all at once—suggests a richness of conscious experience that resists reduction to any single physical process.

The structure of skill transition—resistance, rupture, reorganisation—parallels [[phenomenology-of-conceptual-change|conceptual change]] and [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision|belief revision]], where established cognitive patterns resist replacement by new frameworks. Skill transition is the motor-domain counterpart: the same architecture of conscious override applied to procedural rather than propositional knowledge.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology-of-skill-and-the-lived-body]]
- [[phenomenology-of-flow-states]]
- [[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation]]
- [[interface-friction]]
- [[phenomenology-of-intellectual-effort]]
- [[contemplative-training-and-phenomenal-access]]
- [[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]
- [[phenomenology-of-conceptual-change]]
- [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]
- [[paradox-of-effortless-mastery]]

## References

- Bernstein, N. (1967). *The Coordination and Regulation of Movements*. Pergamon Press.
- Dreyfus, H. & Dreyfus, S. (1986). *Mind Over Machine: The Power of Human Intuition and Expertise in the Era of the Computer*. Free Press.
- Ericsson, K.A. et al. (1993). "The Role of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert Performance." *Psychological Review*, 100(3), 363-406.
- Krakauer, J.W. & Shadmehr, R. (2006). "Consolidation of Motor Memory." *Trends in Neurosciences*, 29(1), 58-64.
- Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/2012). *Phenomenology of Perception*. Trans. D. Landes. Routledge.
