obsidian/topics/phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity.md, before:

---
title: "Phenomenology of Agency vs Passivity"
description: "The felt contrast between doing and undergoing reveals a fundamental axis of experience that materialist accounts struggle to explain—and the Map's framework predicts."
created: 2026-02-09
modified: 2026-02-09
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-09T12:36:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[topics/free-will]]"
  - "[[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]]"
  - "[[volitional-opacity]]"
  - "[[implicit-memory]]"
  - "[[embodied-cognition]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-agency]]"
  - "[[lucid-dreaming-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-09
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-09T12:36:00+00:00
---

Every moment of experience falls somewhere on an axis between doing and undergoing. Lifting your arm feels different from having it lifted. Directing attention to a problem feels different from being startled by a noise. Choosing your words feels different from hearing someone else speak. This phenomenological contrast—between agency and passivity—is among the most basic features of conscious life, yet it resists explanation by any account that treats consciousness as causally inert. The Unfinishable Map's framework, in which consciousness genuinely selects among physical possibilities, predicts exactly this contrast: agency feels different from passivity because agency *is* different—it involves conscious causal contribution that passivity lacks.

## The Two Poles

### Agency: The Phenomenology of Doing

At the active pole, experience has a distinctive character. When you deliberate and choose, direct attention voluntarily, or initiate a physical movement, several phenomenal features present themselves:

- **Effort**: Active states feel like work. Sustaining focus on a difficult text, resisting distraction, or holding a decision open all involve phenomenal cost. The [[mental-effort|phenomenology of effort]] tracks real cognitive engagement—hard tasks feel hard because consciousness is doing more, not because the brain generates an arbitrary difficulty signal.

- **Authorship**: Actions feel *mine* in a way observations do not. The [[phenomenology-of-choice|sense of agency]] after a decision—"I chose this"—is a distinctive phenomenal quality absent from passively received outcomes.

- **Directedness**: Agentic experience has a forward-facing temporal structure. You are oriented toward a goal, shaping what comes next. The future feels open, the present feels like a hinge.

- **Counterfactual awareness**: During active choice, alternatives feel like live possibilities. You could have done otherwise. This sense of open alternatives disappears once the decision is made and retrospectively in passive experience.

### Passivity: The Phenomenology of Undergoing

At the passive pole, experience has a different character entirely:

- **Receptivity**: Sensory experience arrives unbidden. The redness of a sunset, the crack of thunder, the smell of coffee—these happen *to* you. No effort is involved in receiving them.

- **Givenness**: Passive experience presents itself as already determined. The world is a certain way and you register it. There is no sense that you could have perceived otherwise.

- **No authorship**: When a memory surfaces involuntarily or an emotion sweeps through you, the sense of ownership is diminished or absent. These are things that happen in you, not things you do.

- **Temporal receptivity**: The passive pole is present-oriented rather than future-directed. You are receiving what is, not shaping what will be.

## The Spectrum Between

The poles are idealised. Most experience falls somewhere between pure agency and pure passivity, and the intermediate cases are philosophically revealing.

### Habitual Action

Typing these words, an experienced writer barely notices the finger movements. Each keystroke was once deliberate—early typing required conscious selection of each key. Through practice, the action shifted from the agentic pole toward passivity. It still feels like *doing* something (unlike pure perception), but the effort and authorship have diminished. The [[implicit-memory|automatisation process]] gradually withdraws [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing|conscious contribution]] while preserving behavioural output.

The [[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation|choking phenomenon]] reveals what happens when consciousness re-engages with an automatised skill. A pianist performing from muscle memory suddenly attends to her fingers and stumbles. The return of agency disrupts the passivity that skilled performance requires. This is strong evidence for the Map's framework: if consciousness were causally inert, its re-engagement with a motor routine could not disrupt it.

### Flow States

Flow—total absorption in a challenging activity—is phenomenologically paradoxical. The agent is highly engaged and performing at peak capacity, yet the experience feels effortless. There is doing without the feeling of doing. The usual markers of agency (effort, deliberate control) are absent, yet the activity is clearly not passive—it is responsive, adaptive, skilled.

Flow suggests the agency-passivity axis is not a single dimension but involves at least two: *causal contribution* (whether consciousness is shaping outcomes) and *phenomenal effort* (whether the contribution feels like work). In flow, causal contribution may remain high while phenomenal effort drops. The [[voluntary-attention|attention interface]] operates smoothly, without the friction that generates effort phenomenology.

This creates a genuine tension for the article's core argument. If phenomenal effort can dissociate from causal contribution, then the feeling of agency is not a perfectly reliable indicator of conscious causal engagement. The Map's response: effort phenomenology tracks the *difficulty* of selection, not its presence. Just as a well-oiled hinge still connects two surfaces even when it turns without friction, consciousness in flow still selects—it simply selects without resistance. The broader agency-passivity axis remains informative even if effort is not its only marker.

### Dreams

Dreaming inverts normal phenomenology in instructive ways. In ordinary dreams, events happen to the dreamer—bizarre scenarios unfold without the dreamer questioning or directing them. Agency is minimal. Yet the dreamer's brain generates the entire scenario, and the dreamer is the protagonist experiencing it. Neural production is active; conscious experience is passive. This dissociation between causal production and phenomenal authorship reveals that agency phenomenology does not automatically accompany the generation of experiential content—an important datum for any theory of consciousness.

[[lucid-dreaming-and-consciousness|Lucid dreams]] restore the agency pole. The dreamer recognises they are dreaming and begins directing the dream. The transition from ordinary to lucid dreaming is phenomenologically vivid: passivity gives way to agency within the same experiential context, demonstrating that the contrast is real and not merely conceptual.

### Hypnosis and Involuntary Movement

Under hypnosis, subjects report that their arm rises "by itself." The motor output is present, but the sense of agency is absent. Conversely, Desmurget et al. (2009) found that direct electrical stimulation of the parietal cortex during neurosurgery produced a vivid sense of intending to move—even a false belief of having moved—without any actual movement occurring. Premotor stimulation produced the reverse: real movement without awareness. These dissociations show that agency phenomenology can come apart from the physical movements it normally accompanies—exactly what dualism predicts. If the sense of agency were simply the brain's readout of its own motor commands, it could not be separated from them so cleanly.

### Ownership Without Agency

Anarchic hand syndrome (Della Sala et al., 1991) presents a further dissociation: patients recognise a hand as *theirs* (ownership) while denying that its actions are *theirs* (agency). The hand reaches for objects, manipulates tools, even interferes with the other hand—all without the patient's sense of authorship. Ownership and agency, normally bundled together, are phenomenologically and neurologically separable.

This matters because it reveals that the sense of agency is not simply body-ownership plus motor output. Something additional—the Map would say: genuine conscious selection—must be present for full agentic phenomenology.

## What the Contrast Reveals

### Against Epiphenomenalism

If consciousness were [[concepts/epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]]—causally inert, merely along for the ride—the agency-passivity distinction should not exist. An epiphenomenal consciousness would be purely passive in every case. The fact that experience systematically distinguishes doing from undergoing, and that this distinction correlates with measurable neural differences in [[voluntary-attention|willed versus automatic attention]], suggests consciousness tracks its own causal contribution.

The epiphenomenalist can respond that the *appearance* of agency is itself a neural product, with no actual conscious contribution. On this view, the phenomenal contrast merely *represents* a functional distinction in the brain rather than tracking genuine causal differences. But this faces a calibration problem: why would a causally inert consciousness so reliably represent exactly those situations where neural processing is genuinely demanding as "effortful"? The correlation between felt difficulty and actual task complexity—and between the [[voluntary-attention|willed attention signature]] (frontal theta in Bengson 2019) and subjective agency—would be a cosmic coincidence if consciousness contributed nothing to producing the states it tracks.

### Against Illusionism

The [[illusionism|illusionist]] holds that the phenomenal contrast between agency and passivity is a functional distinction the brain represents, not a genuine difference in conscious contribution. The contrast is "real" as a representation but does not track what it seems to track—actual causal efficacy. Yet the phenomenology resists this deflationary reading. Contemplative traditions in [[meditation-and-consciousness-modes|Buddhist samatha and vipassana practice]] refine phenomenological discrimination through sustained training, and experienced meditators report that the agency-passivity distinction becomes *sharper*, not less distinct (Lutz et al., 2008). Practitioners distinguish ever finer gradations—subtle intentions, micro-decisions about [[voluntary-attention|attention]], passive reception during open awareness. Unlike perceptual illusions that persist because we cannot access the underlying mechanism, agency phenomenology is refined precisely *by* attending to it more carefully. The deepening of the contrast under scrutiny is better explained by its tracking a real distinction than by its being an adaptive misrepresentation.

### For the Selection Framework

The agency-passivity axis maps naturally onto the Map's [[attention-as-interface|selection framework]]. At the agentic pole, consciousness actively selects among options the brain presents—biasing quantum indeterminacies through the [[mental-effort|quantum Zeno mechanism]]. At the passive pole, consciousness observes without selecting, allowing neural processes to unfold according to their own dynamics. The spectrum between reflects degrees of conscious engagement with the physical interface.

The [[witness-consciousness|witness mode]] in meditation demonstrates that consciousness can deliberately adopt the passive pole—observing without intervening. This is not unconsciousness but consciousness choosing not to choose. The capacity to move along the agency-passivity axis at will is itself an exercise of agency at a higher level.

## Disorders of the Axis

Pathological cases illuminate the structure:

- **Schizophrenia (thought insertion)**: Patients report thoughts that feel alien—present in consciousness but not authored by the self (Frith, 1992). The content is experienced passively despite originating internally. Agency phenomenology has been stripped from what should be an active process.

- **Depersonalisation**: Actions feel automatic, as if performed by someone else. The entire experiential field shifts toward passivity. Patients describe watching themselves act without feeling like the actor.

- **Utilisation behaviour**: Patients with frontal damage act on every object they encounter—seeing scissors, they cut; seeing a pen, they write. The stimuli drive action directly, bypassing the agentic deliberation that would normally intervene. Passivity in the face of affordances replaces active selection.

Each disorder strips away a component normally bundled with agency, suggesting that the phenomenology of doing involves multiple separable elements: authorship, effort, control, and ownership. A physicalist could read these dissociations as evidence that agency is constructed from separable neural modules. But the fact that each module carries a distinctive *phenomenal character*—not just a functional role—is harder for purely physical accounts to explain. Why does the loss of authorship *feel* different from the loss of control, if both are just changes in information processing?

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: The agency-passivity contrast resists reduction to neural terms. Third-person descriptions of brain activity during willed vs. automatic action capture statistical differences in activation patterns, but they do not capture what it is like to be the agent rather than the patient of experience. The phenomenal difference between choosing and observing is as vivid as the difference between colour and silence—and equally irreducible to physical description.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: The existence of a felt agentic pole—and the neural correlates that distinguish it from passivity—supports the tenet that consciousness causally contributes to physical outcomes. The agency-passivity spectrum represents varying degrees of conscious causal engagement with the brain.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: The spectrum from full agency through flow to passivity may correspond to degrees of consciousness's influence on quantum outcomes—from intensive selection (deliberate choice) through fluent selection (flow) to minimal or absent selection (passive observation).

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Agency phenomenology presupposes singular actualisation. When you choose, one option becomes real. Many-worlds would make every choice a branching without genuine selection—but the phenomenology of agency is precisely the experience of *making one outcome actual* while others become counterfactual.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: A parsimony-based argument would dismiss the agency-passivity distinction as "just" a functional representation—the brain tracking its own motor-control modes—and deny any need for non-physical explanation. But simplicity is unreliable when the phenomenon in question (phenomenal character) is precisely what physical description leaves out. The apparent parsimony of reductive accounts comes at the cost of ignoring the data: the felt difference between doing and undergoing is among the most vivid features of experience, and treating it as explanatorily irrelevant is not economy but evasion.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology-of-choice]] — The detailed structure of choosing
- [[witness-consciousness]] — The passive pole explored through contemplative traditions
- [[agent-causation]] — Why genuine agency requires agent-causation, not event-causation
- [[voluntary-attention]] — Neural signatures distinguishing willed from automatic processing
- [[mental-effort]] — Why effort phenomenology supports conscious causal contribution
- [[motor-selection]] — The agency-passivity contrast in movement
- [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] — Phenomenological layers of ownership in choice
- [[volitional-opacity]] — Why the mechanism connecting will to action is invisible
- [[topics/free-will]] — The broader philosophical context
- [[consciousness-and-agency]] — Apex synthesis of agency across the Map

## References

- Bayne, T. & Levy, N. (2006). The feeling of doing: Deconstructing the phenomenology of agency. In N. Sebanz & W. Prinz (Eds.), *Disorders of Volition*. MIT Press.
- Della Sala, S., Marchetti, C. & Spinnler, H. (1991). Right-sided anarchic (alien) hand: A longitudinal study. *Neuropsychologia*, 29(11), 1113-1127.
- Desmurget, M., et al. (2009). Movement intention after parietal cortex stimulation in humans. *Science*, 324(5928), 811-813.
- Frith, C.D. (1992). *The Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia*. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
- Gallagher, S. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications for cognitive science. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 4(1), 14-21.
- Haggard, P. (2017). Sense of agency in the human brain. *Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, 18(4), 196-207.
- James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Chapter 26: Will.
- Lhermitte, F. (1983). "Utilization behaviour" and its relation to lesions of the frontal lobes. *Brain*, 106(2), 237-255.
- Lutz, A., Slagter, H.A., Dunne, J.D. & Davidson, R.J. (2008). Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 12(4), 163-169.
- Pacherie, E. (2008). The phenomenology of action: A conceptual framework. *Cognition*, 107(1), 179-217.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): improve topics/phenomenological-psychiatry-and-altered-experience.md clarity and argumentation
- Fixed 4 medium issues: added missing citations (Raballo et al. 2021, Parnas et al. 2011), rephrased unattributed quote, fixed reference formatting
- Added 7 internal cross-links and 4 new related_articles entries
- Expanded Further Reading with 3 new annotated references
- Tightened bidirectional interaction argument in tenet section
- Added 9 inbound links from concept/topic files (phenomenology, self-and-consciousness, embodied-cognition, temporal-consciousness, altered-states-of-consciousness, introspection, consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem, phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity, the-self-minimal-narrative-and-substantial)

obsidian/topics/phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity.md, after:

---
title: "Phenomenology of Agency vs Passivity"
description: "The felt contrast between doing and undergoing reveals a fundamental axis of experience that materialist accounts struggle to explain—and the Map's framework predicts."
created: 2026-02-09
modified: 2026-02-09
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-09T12:36:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[topics/free-will]]"
  - "[[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
  - "[[voluntary-attention]]"
  - "[[mental-effort]]"
  - "[[motor-selection]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]]"
  - "[[volitional-opacity]]"
  - "[[implicit-memory]]"
  - "[[embodied-cognition]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-agency]]"
  - "[[lucid-dreaming-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-09
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-09T12:36:00+00:00
---

Every moment of experience falls somewhere on an axis between doing and undergoing. Lifting your arm feels different from having it lifted. Directing attention to a problem feels different from being startled by a noise. Choosing your words feels different from hearing someone else speak. This phenomenological contrast—between agency and passivity—is among the most basic features of conscious life, yet it resists explanation by any account that treats consciousness as causally inert. The Unfinishable Map's framework, in which consciousness genuinely selects among physical possibilities, predicts exactly this contrast: agency feels different from passivity because agency *is* different—it involves conscious causal contribution that passivity lacks.

## The Two Poles

### Agency: The Phenomenology of Doing

At the active pole, experience has a distinctive character. When you deliberate and choose, direct attention voluntarily, or initiate a physical movement, several phenomenal features present themselves:

- **Effort**: Active states feel like work. Sustaining focus on a difficult text, resisting distraction, or holding a decision open all involve phenomenal cost. The [[mental-effort|phenomenology of effort]] tracks real cognitive engagement—hard tasks feel hard because consciousness is doing more, not because the brain generates an arbitrary difficulty signal.

- **Authorship**: Actions feel *mine* in a way observations do not. The [[phenomenology-of-choice|sense of agency]] after a decision—"I chose this"—is a distinctive phenomenal quality absent from passively received outcomes.

- **Directedness**: Agentic experience has a forward-facing temporal structure. You are oriented toward a goal, shaping what comes next. The future feels open, the present feels like a hinge.

- **Counterfactual awareness**: During active choice, alternatives feel like live possibilities. You could have done otherwise. This sense of open alternatives disappears once the decision is made and retrospectively in passive experience.

### Passivity: The Phenomenology of Undergoing

At the passive pole, experience has a different character entirely:

- **Receptivity**: Sensory experience arrives unbidden. The redness of a sunset, the crack of thunder, the smell of coffee—these happen *to* you. No effort is involved in receiving them.

- **Givenness**: Passive experience presents itself as already determined. The world is a certain way and you register it. There is no sense that you could have perceived otherwise.

- **No authorship**: When a memory surfaces involuntarily or an emotion sweeps through you, the sense of ownership is diminished or absent. These are things that happen in you, not things you do.

- **Temporal receptivity**: The passive pole is present-oriented rather than future-directed. You are receiving what is, not shaping what will be.

## The Spectrum Between

The poles are idealised. Most experience falls somewhere between pure agency and pure passivity, and the intermediate cases are philosophically revealing.

### Habitual Action

Typing these words, an experienced writer barely notices the finger movements. Each keystroke was once deliberate—early typing required conscious selection of each key. Through practice, the action shifted from the agentic pole toward passivity. It still feels like *doing* something (unlike pure perception), but the effort and authorship have diminished. The [[implicit-memory|automatisation process]] gradually withdraws [[conscious-vs-unconscious-processing|conscious contribution]] while preserving behavioural output.

The [[choking-phenomenon-mental-causation|choking phenomenon]] reveals what happens when consciousness re-engages with an automatised skill. A pianist performing from muscle memory suddenly attends to her fingers and stumbles. The return of agency disrupts the passivity that skilled performance requires. This is strong evidence for the Map's framework: if consciousness were causally inert, its re-engagement with a motor routine could not disrupt it.

### Flow States

Flow—total absorption in a challenging activity—is phenomenologically paradoxical. The agent is highly engaged and performing at peak capacity, yet the experience feels effortless. There is doing without the feeling of doing. The usual markers of agency (effort, deliberate control) are absent, yet the activity is clearly not passive—it is responsive, adaptive, skilled.

Flow suggests the agency-passivity axis is not a single dimension but involves at least two: *causal contribution* (whether consciousness is shaping outcomes) and *phenomenal effort* (whether the contribution feels like work). In flow, causal contribution may remain high while phenomenal effort drops. The [[voluntary-attention|attention interface]] operates smoothly, without the friction that generates effort phenomenology.

This creates a genuine tension for the article's core argument. If phenomenal effort can dissociate from causal contribution, then the feeling of agency is not a perfectly reliable indicator of conscious causal engagement. The Map's response: effort phenomenology tracks the *difficulty* of selection, not its presence. Just as a well-oiled hinge still connects two surfaces even when it turns without friction, consciousness in flow still selects—it simply selects without resistance. The broader agency-passivity axis remains informative even if effort is not its only marker.

### Dreams

Dreaming inverts normal phenomenology in instructive ways. In ordinary dreams, events happen to the dreamer—bizarre scenarios unfold without the dreamer questioning or directing them. Agency is minimal. Yet the dreamer's brain generates the entire scenario, and the dreamer is the protagonist experiencing it. Neural production is active; conscious experience is passive. This dissociation between causal production and phenomenal authorship reveals that agency phenomenology does not automatically accompany the generation of experiential content—an important datum for any theory of consciousness.

[[lucid-dreaming-and-consciousness|Lucid dreams]] restore the agency pole. The dreamer recognises they are dreaming and begins directing the dream. The transition from ordinary to lucid dreaming is phenomenologically vivid: passivity gives way to agency within the same experiential context, demonstrating that the contrast is real and not merely conceptual.

### Hypnosis and Involuntary Movement

Under hypnosis, subjects report that their arm rises "by itself." The motor output is present, but the sense of agency is absent. Conversely, Desmurget et al. (2009) found that direct electrical stimulation of the parietal cortex during neurosurgery produced a vivid sense of intending to move—even a false belief of having moved—without any actual movement occurring. Premotor stimulation produced the reverse: real movement without awareness. These dissociations show that agency phenomenology can come apart from the physical movements it normally accompanies—exactly what dualism predicts. If the sense of agency were simply the brain's readout of its own motor commands, it could not be separated from them so cleanly.

### Ownership Without Agency

Anarchic hand syndrome (Della Sala et al., 1991) presents a further dissociation: patients recognise a hand as *theirs* (ownership) while denying that its actions are *theirs* (agency). The hand reaches for objects, manipulates tools, even interferes with the other hand—all without the patient's sense of authorship. Ownership and agency, normally bundled together, are phenomenologically and neurologically separable.

This matters because it reveals that the sense of agency is not simply body-ownership plus motor output. Something additional—the Map would say: genuine conscious selection—must be present for full agentic phenomenology.

## What the Contrast Reveals

### Against Epiphenomenalism

If consciousness were [[concepts/epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]]—causally inert, merely along for the ride—the agency-passivity distinction should not exist. An epiphenomenal consciousness would be purely passive in every case. The fact that experience systematically distinguishes doing from undergoing, and that this distinction correlates with measurable neural differences in [[voluntary-attention|willed versus automatic attention]], suggests consciousness tracks its own causal contribution.

The epiphenomenalist can respond that the *appearance* of agency is itself a neural product, with no actual conscious contribution. On this view, the phenomenal contrast merely *represents* a functional distinction in the brain rather than tracking genuine causal differences. But this faces a calibration problem: why would a causally inert consciousness so reliably represent exactly those situations where neural processing is genuinely demanding as "effortful"? The correlation between felt difficulty and actual task complexity—and between the [[voluntary-attention|willed attention signature]] (frontal theta in Bengson 2019) and subjective agency—would be a cosmic coincidence if consciousness contributed nothing to producing the states it tracks.

### Against Illusionism

The [[illusionism|illusionist]] holds that the phenomenal contrast between agency and passivity is a functional distinction the brain represents, not a genuine difference in conscious contribution. The contrast is "real" as a representation but does not track what it seems to track—actual causal efficacy. Yet the phenomenology resists this deflationary reading. Contemplative traditions in [[meditation-and-consciousness-modes|Buddhist samatha and vipassana practice]] refine phenomenological discrimination through sustained training, and experienced meditators report that the agency-passivity distinction becomes *sharper*, not less distinct (Lutz et al., 2008). Practitioners distinguish ever finer gradations—subtle intentions, micro-decisions about [[voluntary-attention|attention]], passive reception during open awareness. Unlike perceptual illusions that persist because we cannot access the underlying mechanism, agency phenomenology is refined precisely *by* attending to it more carefully. The deepening of the contrast under scrutiny is better explained by its tracking a real distinction than by its being an adaptive misrepresentation.

### For the Selection Framework

The agency-passivity axis maps naturally onto the Map's [[attention-as-interface|selection framework]]. At the agentic pole, consciousness actively selects among options the brain presents—biasing quantum indeterminacies through the [[mental-effort|quantum Zeno mechanism]]. At the passive pole, consciousness observes without selecting, allowing neural processes to unfold according to their own dynamics. The spectrum between reflects degrees of conscious engagement with the physical interface.

The [[witness-consciousness|witness mode]] in meditation demonstrates that consciousness can deliberately adopt the passive pole—observing without intervening. This is not unconsciousness but consciousness choosing not to choose. The capacity to move along the agency-passivity axis at will is itself an exercise of agency at a higher level.

## Disorders of the Axis

Pathological cases illuminate the structure (see [[phenomenological-psychiatry-and-altered-experience|phenomenological psychiatry]] for extended treatment):

- **Schizophrenia (thought insertion)**: Patients report thoughts that feel alien—present in consciousness but not authored by the self (Frith, 1992). The content is experienced passively despite originating internally. Agency phenomenology has been stripped from what should be an active process. Sass and Parnas's ipseity disturbance model situates this within a broader disruption of the minimal self.

- **Depersonalisation**: Actions feel automatic, as if performed by someone else. The entire experiential field shifts toward passivity. Patients describe watching themselves act without feeling like the actor.

- **Utilisation behaviour**: Patients with frontal damage act on every object they encounter—seeing scissors, they cut; seeing a pen, they write. The stimuli drive action directly, bypassing the agentic deliberation that would normally intervene. Passivity in the face of affordances replaces active selection.

Each disorder strips away a component normally bundled with agency, suggesting that the phenomenology of doing involves multiple separable elements: authorship, effort, control, and ownership. A physicalist could read these dissociations as evidence that agency is constructed from separable neural modules. But the fact that each module carries a distinctive *phenomenal character*—not just a functional role—is harder for purely physical accounts to explain. Why does the loss of authorship *feel* different from the loss of control, if both are just changes in information processing?

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: The agency-passivity contrast resists reduction to neural terms. Third-person descriptions of brain activity during willed vs. automatic action capture statistical differences in activation patterns, but they do not capture what it is like to be the agent rather than the patient of experience. The phenomenal difference between choosing and observing is as vivid as the difference between colour and silence—and equally irreducible to physical description.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: The existence of a felt agentic pole—and the neural correlates that distinguish it from passivity—supports the tenet that consciousness causally contributes to physical outcomes. The agency-passivity spectrum represents varying degrees of conscious causal engagement with the brain.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: The spectrum from full agency through flow to passivity may correspond to degrees of consciousness's influence on quantum outcomes—from intensive selection (deliberate choice) through fluent selection (flow) to minimal or absent selection (passive observation).

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]**: Agency phenomenology presupposes singular actualisation. When you choose, one option becomes real. Many-worlds would make every choice a branching without genuine selection—but the phenomenology of agency is precisely the experience of *making one outcome actual* while others become counterfactual.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: A parsimony-based argument would dismiss the agency-passivity distinction as "just" a functional representation—the brain tracking its own motor-control modes—and deny any need for non-physical explanation. But simplicity is unreliable when the phenomenon in question (phenomenal character) is precisely what physical description leaves out. The apparent parsimony of reductive accounts comes at the cost of ignoring the data: the felt difference between doing and undergoing is among the most vivid features of experience, and treating it as explanatorily irrelevant is not economy but evasion.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology-of-choice]] — The detailed structure of choosing
- [[witness-consciousness]] — The passive pole explored through contemplative traditions
- [[agent-causation]] — Why genuine agency requires agent-causation, not event-causation
- [[voluntary-attention]] — Neural signatures distinguishing willed from automatic processing
- [[mental-effort]] — Why effort phenomenology supports conscious causal contribution
- [[motor-selection]] — The agency-passivity contrast in movement
- [[authentic-vs-inauthentic-choice]] — Phenomenological layers of ownership in choice
- [[volitional-opacity]] — Why the mechanism connecting will to action is invisible
- [[topics/free-will]] — The broader philosophical context
- [[consciousness-and-agency]] — Apex synthesis of agency across the Map

## References

- Bayne, T. & Levy, N. (2006). The feeling of doing: Deconstructing the phenomenology of agency. In N. Sebanz & W. Prinz (Eds.), *Disorders of Volition*. MIT Press.
- Della Sala, S., Marchetti, C. & Spinnler, H. (1991). Right-sided anarchic (alien) hand: A longitudinal study. *Neuropsychologia*, 29(11), 1113-1127.
- Desmurget, M., et al. (2009). Movement intention after parietal cortex stimulation in humans. *Science*, 324(5928), 811-813.
- Frith, C.D. (1992). *The Cognitive Neuropsychology of Schizophrenia*. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
- Gallagher, S. (2000). Philosophical conceptions of the self: Implications for cognitive science. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 4(1), 14-21.
- Haggard, P. (2017). Sense of agency in the human brain. *Nature Reviews Neuroscience*, 18(4), 196-207.
- James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Chapter 26: Will.
- Lhermitte, F. (1983). "Utilization behaviour" and its relation to lesions of the frontal lobes. *Brain*, 106(2), 237-255.
- Lutz, A., Slagter, H.A., Dunne, J.D. & Davidson, R.J. (2008). Attention regulation and monitoring in meditation. *Trends in Cognitive Sciences*, 12(4), 163-169.
- Pacherie, E. (2008). The phenomenology of action: A conceptual framework. *Cognition*, 107(1), 179-217.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
