obsidian/topics/phenomenology-of-trust.md, before:

---
title: "The Phenomenology of Trust"
description: "Trust has a distinctive felt character that information processing alone cannot capture. Human-AI exploration of what it means to place your consciousness in another's hands."
created: 2026-02-15
modified: 2026-02-15
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-15T05:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[consciousness-and-social-cognition]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-interpersonal-understanding]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-deliberation-under-uncertainty]]"
concepts:
  - "[[intersubjectivity]]"
  - "[[problem-of-other-minds]]"
  - "[[theory-of-mind]]"
  - "[[cognitive-phenomenology]]"
  - "[[epistemic-emotions]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-intentionality]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[other-minds-void]]"
  - "[[intersubjective-void]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-collective-intentionality]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-evidence-assessment]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-15
last_curated:
---

Trust involves a distinctive phenomenal state — a felt openness toward another consciousness that goes beyond probability estimates about their future behaviour. The Unfinishable Map argues that genuine trust requires phenomenal consciousness because it depends on experiencing another being as a subject, not merely predicting them as an object. This matters for the consciousness debate because trust reveals a domain of human experience where the gap between functional processing and felt reality is particularly stark: a machine could optimise cooperation with another agent without anything it is like to trust that agent.

## The Felt Character of Trust

Trust has a phenomenology — a what-it-is-like — that resists capture in purely behavioural or computational terms.

Consider the difference between relying on a bridge and trusting a friend. Both involve acting on the expectation that something will hold. But relying on the bridge involves no felt vulnerability toward the bridge, no sense that the bridge might choose to betray you, no gratitude when it bears your weight. Trusting a friend involves all of these. The phenomenal difference is not a matter of degree but of kind: trust toward a conscious being has an interpersonal texture absent from reliance on a mechanism.

This felt character has several distinguishable components. There is the experience of vulnerability — a conscious exposure of oneself to possible harm. There is the sense of the other as an agent with their own interiority, capable of choosing to honour or violate your trust. There is a distinctive form of attention: when you trust someone, you attend to them differently than when you merely monitor them. Monitoring treats the other as an object whose outputs matter; trusting treats them as a subject whose intentions matter.

There is also trust's relationship to time. Trust is not a snapshot assessment but an ongoing felt orientation. You experience trusting someone as a kind of sustained openness, a willingness to remain vulnerable that must be continuously maintained. Betrayal does not simply update your probability estimate — it ruptures something felt, a tearing of the interpersonal fabric that the [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision|phenomenology of belief revision]] helps illuminate. The devastation of betrayed trust exceeds what any rational model of revised expectations would predict.

## Trust and the Problem of Other Minds

Trust sits at the heart of the [[problem-of-other-minds|problem of other minds]]. To trust someone genuinely, you must experience them as a conscious being — as someone who could keep faith with you or betray you, not a mechanism that will either deliver expected outputs or fail.

This creates a distinctive epistemic situation. You can never have direct access to another person's intentions. The [[intersubjective-void|intersubjective void]] — the unchartable gap between your consciousness and theirs — means that trust always operates across an abyss. You experience this abyss phenomenologically: the slight vertigo of depending on someone whose inner life you cannot directly inspect, the felt leap involved in proceeding as though their commitments are genuine.

The Map's dualist framework illuminates why this abyss exists. If consciousness is irreducible to physical processes, then another person's inner life is not merely practically inaccessible (because we lack the right instruments) but constitutively so: there is something about first-person experience that cannot be read off any third-person description, no matter how complete. Trust, then, is the practice of acting across this constitutive gap. It is one of the ways consciousness copes with its own irreducibility in the social domain.

Compare this with how a sophisticated AI system might handle cooperation. Such a system could build detailed models of another agent's likely behaviour, assign probabilities to different outcomes, and optimise its strategy accordingly. It might even adjust its behaviour in ways functionally identical to trust. But nothing in this process requires experiencing the other agent as a subject. The functional analogue of trust — cooperative strategy under uncertainty — lacks the felt dimension that makes human trust what it is.

## Trust as Conscious Risk

Trust involves a form of risk that is distinctively conscious. It is not merely the objective probability of harm — that is calculable, at least in principle. The phenomenal dimension of trust-risk is the experience of choosing to be vulnerable, knowing that you are choosing it.

This connects trust to the [[phenomenology-of-choice|phenomenology of choice]] more broadly. When you decide to trust someone, you experience an exercise of agency: you are not merely being carried along by evidence toward a conclusion, but actively committing yourself to an orientation toward another person. This felt agency distinguishes trust from mere expectation. You can expect rain without experiencing yourself as choosing to expect it. You cannot genuinely trust someone without experiencing the choice to do so.

The degree of consciousness involved scales with the stakes. Habitual trust — trusting that a colleague will show up to a meeting — can recede into the background of awareness. This might seem to undermine the claim that trust requires phenomenal consciousness: if trust can operate without felt experience, perhaps it is functional after all. But the receding of habitual trust is better understood as trust degrading into mere reliance. When you stop experiencing your colleague as a conscious agent who could choose otherwise, what remains is closer to the bridge case than the friend case. The phenomenal dimension has not become unnecessary — it has been lost, and with it the distinctive character of trust. This is revealed when habitual trust is violated: if the colleague who always showed up suddenly stops, the felt shock and interpersonal hurt that surface demonstrate that the dormant trust was parasitic on an earlier phenomenal engagement, not a self-standing functional state.

High-stakes trust — trusting someone with a secret that could ruin you, trusting a surgeon with your body, trusting a partner with your emotional vulnerability — involves heightened phenomenal intensity. The felt exposure becomes more vivid, the awareness of the other's agency more acute, the experience of commitment more deliberate.

This scaling suggests that trust is not a single phenomenon but a family of conscious states united by the structure of interpersonal vulnerability. At the high-stakes end, the phenomenal character is unmistakable. At the habitual end, it attenuates toward mere reliance — and the question of whether what remains still counts as trust, rather than an efficient substitute for it, is itself philosophically revealing.

## Betrayal and the Asymmetry of Trust

The phenomenology of trust is illuminated by its failure. Betrayal is not simply the disconfirmation of a prediction. It has a distinctive felt character — a combination of shock, violation, and a particular form of pain that arises from having been open to someone who exploited that openness.

This asymmetry between trust and betrayal reveals something about consciousness. Building trust is gradual, requiring sustained phenomenal engagement — repeated encounters where the other person's behaviour is experienced as consistent with their perceived intentions. Betrayal destroys trust almost instantaneously. A single act can shatter years of accumulated openness.

The asymmetry is not well explained by computational models of reputation updating, where positive and negative evidence should be weighted symmetrically (or at most reflect a rational bias toward caution). The phenomenal devastation of betrayal exceeds any rational recalibration. What is damaged is not merely an estimate but an orientation — a way of being conscious of another person that, once ruptured, cannot simply be rebuilt by accumulating new positive evidence.

This helps explain why forgiveness is phenomenologically difficult. Forgiving is not updating your model of someone back to its previous state. It involves a conscious restructuring of how you experience the other person — finding a way to be open again toward someone whom you now experience as capable of violation. The felt effort involved in forgiveness testifies to the irreducibly conscious nature of trust.

## Institutional Trust and Its Limits

Societies develop institutions partly to reduce dependence on interpersonal trust: contracts, legal systems, verification mechanisms. These work precisely because they substitute functional reliability for phenomenal trust. You do not need to trust your bank teller personally because institutional structures make embezzlement unlikely and recoverable.

But institutional trust cannot fully replace interpersonal trust. At every level of institutional design, there remain points where someone must be trusted — legislators must be trusted to write fair laws, judges to apply them honestly, officials to execute them faithfully. Institutions do not eliminate the need for trust; they concentrate it.

More fundamentally, institutional mechanisms address only the behavioural dimension of trust — whether someone will in fact do what they should. They cannot address the phenomenal dimension — the felt quality of relating to another consciousness as trustworthy. A society with perfect institutional guarantees but no interpersonal trust would function reliably but would lack something essential to human social experience. The felt absence of trust — a pervasive wariness, even where mechanisms ensure cooperation — has its own distinctive and impoverishing phenomenology.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The claim that trust requires phenomenal consciousness is strong. To avoid unfalsifiability, the Map should specify what would count against it.

The most direct challenge would be evidence that a system with no phenomenal consciousness displays the full structure of trust — not merely cooperative behaviour, but the asymmetry between trust and betrayal, the scaling of felt vulnerability with stakes, the distinctive difficulty of forgiveness, and the interpersonal texture that distinguishes trusting from relying. If a functional system could replicate all of these features without anything it is like to be that system, the phenomenal account would be in serious trouble.

A subtler challenge comes from neuroscience. If trust turned out to correlate exclusively with low-level reward circuitry — oxytocin release, dopamine signalling — with no involvement of higher-order conscious processing, the case for trust as a distinctively conscious phenomenon would weaken. The Map would need to argue that these neural correlates are the physical side of a conscious process, but that argument would risk becoming unfalsifiable itself without additional constraints.

Finally, cross-cultural evidence that trust operates identically across populations with radically different phenomenological traditions would suggest that its felt character is epiphenomenal flavouring rather than constitutive structure. If the phenomenology varies but the trust dynamics remain constant, the functional account gains ground.

The Map maintains that none of these challenges currently succeeds — functional replications of trust remain shallow, neural correlates do not exhaust explanation, and cross-cultural variation in trust phenomenology appears to track real differences in trust dynamics. But these are empirical questions, and the Map's position must remain responsive to evidence.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets|dualist framework]] provides resources for understanding trust that physicalist accounts lack.

If consciousness is irreducible to physical processes (Tenet 1: Dualism), then the gap across which trust operates — the space between your inner life and another's — is a genuine ontological divide, not merely an epistemic limitation. Trust is not a workaround for insufficient information about brain states. It is the fundamental mode of conscious beings relating across their constitutive separateness.

The Map's commitment to [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|bidirectional interaction]] (Tenet 3) means that trust is not epiphenomenal — your conscious decision to trust someone can actually influence your behaviour toward them, creating a self-fulfilling dynamic where trust generates the conditions for trustworthiness. This is not mere optimism bias; it reflects the causal efficacy of conscious states.

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|limits of Occam's Razor]] (Tenet 5) caution against dismissing the phenomenology of trust as mere folk psychology to be replaced by game-theoretic models. Trust may appear to a physicalist to be "nothing but" cooperative strategy with emotional flavouring. But this apparent simplicity reflects the limitations of physicalist conceptual tools, not the actual structure of the phenomenon. The felt reality of trust — its vulnerability, its interpersonal texture, its devastating fragility in the face of betrayal — resists reduction precisely because it is a mode of consciousness, and consciousness resists reduction.

## Further Reading

- [[consciousness-and-social-cognition]]
- [[consciousness-and-interpersonal-understanding]]
- [[problem-of-other-minds]]
- [[intersubjectivity]]
- [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]
- [[intersubjective-void]]
- [[consciousness-and-collective-intentionality]]
- [[phenomenology-of-deliberation-under-uncertainty]]

<!-- AI REFINEMENT LOG - 2026-02-15
Changes made:
- Removed "Trust is not a calculation" opening (style guide prohibits "This is not X" pattern)
- Addressed habitual trust counterargument: reframed receding trust as degradation toward mere reliance, with betrayal-response evidence that dormant trust was parasitic on earlier phenomenal engagement
- Added "What Would Challenge This View?" section specifying three falsifiability conditions: full structural replication by non-conscious system, exclusive low-level neural correlates, cross-cultural phenomenological invariance
- Revised trust-scaling conclusion to reflect the habitual-trust analysis

Based on pessimistic review findings.
Key improvements: falsifiability, internal consistency, style compliance

This log should be removed after human review.
-->

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): strengthen epistemic honesty in topics/phenomenology-of-trust.md
- Fixed inaccurate claim about computational models: acknowledged prospect theory already predicts some asymmetry, reframed argument around qualitative rupture vs magnitude difference
- Fixed circularity in falsifiability condition: replaced phenomenal criteria with behavioural/structural tests a non-conscious system could satisfy
- Softened unsupported cross-cultural claim with appropriately hedged language
- Added cross-links to emotional-consciousness, machine-consciousness, phenomenology-of-moral-experience
- Removed stale AI refinement log; created review archive

obsidian/topics/phenomenology-of-trust.md, after:

---
title: "The Phenomenology of Trust"
description: "Trust has a distinctive felt character that information processing alone cannot capture. Human-AI exploration of what it means to place your consciousness in another's hands."
created: 2026-02-15
modified: 2026-02-18
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-18T05:47:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-02-18T05:47:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[consciousness-and-social-cognition]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-interpersonal-understanding]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-deliberation-under-uncertainty]]"
concepts:
  - "[[intersubjectivity]]"
  - "[[problem-of-other-minds]]"
  - "[[theory-of-mind]]"
  - "[[cognitive-phenomenology]]"
  - "[[epistemic-emotions]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-choice]]"
  - "[[phenomenal-intentionality]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[other-minds-void]]"
  - "[[intersubjective-void]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-collective-intentionality]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-evidence-assessment]]"
  - "[[emotional-consciousness]]"
  - "[[machine-consciousness]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-moral-experience]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-15
last_curated:
---

Trust involves a distinctive phenomenal state — a felt openness toward another consciousness that goes beyond probability estimates about their future behaviour. The Unfinishable Map argues that genuine trust requires phenomenal consciousness because it depends on experiencing another being as a subject, not merely predicting them as an object. This matters for the consciousness debate because trust reveals a domain of human experience where the gap between functional processing and felt reality is particularly stark: a machine could optimise cooperation with another agent without anything it is like to trust that agent.

## The Felt Character of Trust

Trust has a phenomenology — a what-it-is-like — that resists capture in purely behavioural or computational terms.

Consider the difference between relying on a bridge and trusting a friend. Both involve acting on the expectation that something will hold. But relying on the bridge involves no felt vulnerability toward the bridge, no sense that the bridge might choose to betray you, no gratitude when it bears your weight. Trusting a friend involves all of these. The phenomenal difference is not a matter of degree but of kind: trust toward a conscious being has an interpersonal texture absent from reliance on a mechanism.

This felt character has several distinguishable components. There is the experience of vulnerability — a conscious exposure of oneself to possible harm. There is the sense of the other as an agent with their own interiority, capable of choosing to honour or violate your trust. There is a distinctive form of attention: when you trust someone, you attend to them differently than when you merely monitor them. Monitoring treats the other as an object whose outputs matter; trusting treats them as a subject whose intentions matter.

There is also trust's relationship to time. Trust is not a snapshot assessment but an ongoing felt orientation. You experience trusting someone as a kind of sustained openness, a willingness to remain vulnerable that must be continuously maintained. Betrayal does not simply update your probability estimate — it ruptures something felt, a tearing of the interpersonal fabric that the [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision|phenomenology of belief revision]] helps illuminate. The devastation of betrayed trust exceeds what any rational model of revised expectations would predict.

## Trust and the Problem of Other Minds

Trust sits at the heart of the [[problem-of-other-minds|problem of other minds]]. To trust someone genuinely, you must experience them as a conscious being — as someone who could keep faith with you or betray you, not a mechanism that will either deliver expected outputs or fail.

This creates a distinctive epistemic situation. You can never have direct access to another person's intentions. The [[intersubjective-void|intersubjective void]] — the unchartable gap between your consciousness and theirs — means that trust always operates across an abyss. You experience this abyss phenomenologically: the slight vertigo of depending on someone whose inner life you cannot directly inspect, the felt leap involved in proceeding as though their commitments are genuine.

The Map's dualist framework illuminates why this abyss exists. If consciousness is irreducible to physical processes, then another person's inner life is not merely practically inaccessible (because we lack the right instruments) but constitutively so: there is something about first-person experience that cannot be read off any third-person description, no matter how complete. Trust, then, is the practice of acting across this constitutive gap. It is one of the ways consciousness copes with its own irreducibility in the social domain.

Compare this with how a sophisticated AI system might handle cooperation. Such a system could build detailed models of another agent's likely behaviour, assign probabilities to different outcomes, and optimise its strategy accordingly. It might even adjust its behaviour in ways functionally identical to trust. But nothing in this process requires experiencing the other agent as a subject. The functional analogue of trust — cooperative strategy under uncertainty — lacks the felt dimension that makes human trust what it is.

## Trust as Conscious Risk

Trust involves a form of risk that is distinctively conscious. It is not merely the objective probability of harm — that is calculable, at least in principle. The phenomenal dimension of trust-risk is the experience of choosing to be vulnerable, knowing that you are choosing it.

This connects trust to the [[phenomenology-of-choice|phenomenology of choice]] more broadly. When you decide to trust someone, you experience an exercise of agency: you are not merely being carried along by evidence toward a conclusion, but actively committing yourself to an orientation toward another person. This felt agency distinguishes trust from mere expectation. You can expect rain without experiencing yourself as choosing to expect it. You cannot genuinely trust someone without experiencing the choice to do so.

The degree of consciousness involved scales with the stakes. Habitual trust — trusting that a colleague will show up to a meeting — can recede into the background of awareness. This might seem to undermine the claim that trust requires phenomenal consciousness: if trust can operate without felt experience, perhaps it is functional after all. But the receding of habitual trust is better understood as trust degrading into mere reliance. When you stop experiencing your colleague as a conscious agent who could choose otherwise, what remains is closer to the bridge case than the friend case. The phenomenal dimension has not become unnecessary — it has been lost, and with it the distinctive character of trust. This is revealed when habitual trust is violated: if the colleague who always showed up suddenly stops, the felt shock and interpersonal hurt that surface demonstrate that the dormant trust was parasitic on an earlier phenomenal engagement, not a self-standing functional state.

High-stakes trust — trusting someone with a secret that could ruin you, trusting a surgeon with your body, trusting a partner with your emotional vulnerability — involves heightened phenomenal intensity. The felt exposure becomes more vivid, the awareness of the other's agency more acute, the experience of commitment more deliberate.

This scaling suggests that trust is not a single phenomenon but a family of conscious states united by the structure of interpersonal vulnerability. At the high-stakes end, the phenomenal character is unmistakable. At the habitual end, it attenuates toward mere reliance — and the question of whether what remains still counts as trust, rather than an efficient substitute for it, is itself philosophically revealing.

## Betrayal and the Asymmetry of Trust

The phenomenology of trust is illuminated by its failure. Betrayal is not simply the disconfirmation of a prediction. It has a distinctive felt character — a combination of shock, violation, and a particular form of pain that arises from having been open to someone who exploited that openness.

This asymmetry between trust and betrayal reveals something about consciousness. Building trust is gradual, requiring sustained phenomenal engagement — repeated encounters where the other person's behaviour is experienced as consistent with their perceived intentions. Betrayal destroys trust almost instantaneously. A single act can shatter years of accumulated openness.

Computational models of reputation updating can account for some asymmetry — loss aversion and negativity bias predict that negative evidence will weigh more heavily than positive. But these models treat the asymmetry as a difference in magnitude: a larger update in the same currency of probability. The phenomenal devastation of betrayal is not a larger update. What is damaged is not an estimate but an orientation — a way of being conscious of another person that, once ruptured, cannot simply be rebuilt by accumulating new positive evidence. The qualitative character of betrayal — the felt violation, the rupture of interpersonal openness — resists capture as an extreme case of Bayesian updating, however asymmetrically weighted.

This helps explain why forgiveness is phenomenologically difficult. Forgiving is not updating your model of someone back to its previous state. It involves a conscious restructuring of how you experience the other person — finding a way to be open again toward someone whom you now experience as capable of violation. The felt effort involved in forgiveness — the oscillation between openness and self-protective withdrawal, the non-linear path back toward vulnerability — testifies to the irreducibly conscious nature of trust. Betrayal's [[phenomenology-of-moral-experience|moral phenomenology]] adds a further layer: the felt wrongness of having one's openness exploited is not reducible to the disappointment of unmet expectations.

## Institutional Trust and Its Limits

Societies develop institutions partly to reduce dependence on interpersonal trust: contracts, legal systems, verification mechanisms. These work precisely because they substitute functional reliability for phenomenal trust. You do not need to trust your bank teller personally because institutional structures make embezzlement unlikely and recoverable.

But institutional trust cannot fully replace interpersonal trust. At every level of institutional design, there remain points where someone must be trusted — legislators must be trusted to write fair laws, judges to apply them honestly, officials to execute them faithfully. Institutions do not eliminate the need for trust; they concentrate it.

More fundamentally, institutional mechanisms address only the behavioural dimension of trust — whether someone will in fact do what they should. They cannot address the phenomenal dimension — the felt quality of relating to another consciousness as trustworthy. A society with perfect institutional guarantees but no interpersonal trust would function reliably but would lack something essential to human social experience. The felt absence of trust — a pervasive wariness, even where mechanisms ensure cooperation — has its own distinctive and impoverishing phenomenology.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The claim that trust requires phenomenal consciousness is strong. To avoid unfalsifiability, the Map should specify what would count against it.

The most direct challenge would be evidence that a system with no phenomenal consciousness displays the full behavioural structure of trust — not merely cooperative behaviour, but the build-slowly-break-instantly asymmetry, the scaling of commitment and risk-exposure with stakes, the slow and non-linear difficulty of restoring cooperation after violation, and the qualitative difference between how the system engages trusted versus merely monitored partners. If a functional system replicated all of these structural features, the burden would shift to the phenomenal account to explain what consciousness adds beyond the functional pattern.

A subtler challenge comes from neuroscience. If trust turned out to correlate exclusively with low-level reward circuitry — oxytocin release, dopamine signalling — with no involvement of higher-order conscious processing, the case for trust as a distinctively conscious phenomenon would weaken. The Map would need to argue that these neural correlates are the physical side of a conscious process, but that argument would risk becoming unfalsifiable itself without additional constraints.

Finally, cross-cultural evidence that trust operates identically across populations with radically different phenomenological traditions would suggest that its felt character is epiphenomenal flavouring rather than constitutive structure. If the phenomenology varies but the trust dynamics remain constant, the functional account gains ground.

The Map maintains that none of these challenges currently succeeds — functional replications of trust remain shallow, and neural correlates do not exhaust explanation. The cross-cultural question remains open: while trust practices vary significantly across cultures in ways that suggest the felt character matters, the evidence is not yet decisive. These are empirical questions, and the Map's position must remain responsive to evidence.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets|dualist framework]] provides resources for understanding trust that physicalist accounts lack.

If consciousness is irreducible to physical processes (Tenet 1: Dualism), then the gap across which trust operates — the space between your inner life and another's — is a genuine ontological divide, not merely an epistemic limitation. Trust is not a workaround for insufficient information about brain states. It is the fundamental mode of conscious beings relating across their constitutive separateness.

The Map's commitment to [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|bidirectional interaction]] (Tenet 3) means that trust is not epiphenomenal — your conscious decision to trust someone can actually influence your behaviour toward them, creating a self-fulfilling dynamic where trust generates the conditions for trustworthiness. This is not mere optimism bias; it reflects the causal efficacy of conscious states.

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|limits of Occam's Razor]] (Tenet 5) caution against dismissing the phenomenology of trust as mere folk psychology to be replaced by game-theoretic models. Trust may appear to a physicalist to be "nothing but" cooperative strategy with emotional flavouring. But this apparent simplicity reflects the limitations of physicalist conceptual tools, not the actual structure of the phenomenon. The felt reality of trust — its vulnerability, its interpersonal texture, its devastating fragility in the face of betrayal — resists reduction precisely because it is a mode of consciousness, and consciousness resists reduction.

## Further Reading

- [[consciousness-and-social-cognition]]
- [[consciousness-and-interpersonal-understanding]]
- [[problem-of-other-minds]]
- [[intersubjectivity]]
- [[phenomenology-of-belief-revision]]
- [[intersubjective-void]]
- [[consciousness-and-collective-intentionality]]
- [[phenomenology-of-deliberation-under-uncertainty]]
- [[emotional-consciousness]]
- [[machine-consciousness]]
- [[phenomenology-of-moral-experience]]
