obsidian/topics/phenomenological-psychiatry-and-altered-experience.md, before:

---
title: "Phenomenological Psychiatry and Altered Experience"
description: "How schizophrenia, depression, and depersonalization reveal the hidden architecture of consciousness—evidence from phenomenological psychiatry for the irreducibility of first-person experience."
created: 2026-02-21
modified: 2026-02-21
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-22T05:09:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[the-case-for-dualism]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[intentionality]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-pain]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-memory-and-the-self]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-flow-states]]"
  - "[[the-self-minimal-narrative-and-substantial]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem]]"
  - "[[first-person-third-person-methodology]]"
  - "[[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-21
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-22T05:09:00+00:00
---

Phenomenological psychiatry treats mental illness not as mere neurochemical malfunction but as a modification of the fundamental structures of lived experience. By studying how schizophrenia distorts selfhood, how depression collapses temporal openness, and how depersonalization fractures the transparency of awareness, this tradition reveals an architecture of consciousness that is normally invisible — and that resists straightforward reduction to neural description. The Unfinishable Map finds in these clinical observations some of the strongest empirical grounds for taking first-person experience seriously as an irreducible domain.

The central insight is a distinction between the *form* and the *content* of experience. A depressed person does not merely feel sad about particular things; the entire structure of lived time closes, making hope structurally impossible. A person with schizophrenia does not merely hold strange beliefs; the pre-reflective sense that experiences belong to a self — what phenomenologists call *ipseity* — is disrupted at its foundation. These are not changes in what someone experiences but in how experiencing itself works.

## From Jaspers to the Present

Karl Jaspers introduced [[phenomenology]] into psychiatry in *General Psychopathology* (1913) with a distinction that still organises the field: between *understanding* (Verstehen) — grasping another person's experience through empathic engagement — and *explanation* (Erklären) — identifying causal mechanisms in the brain. Jaspers argued that some psychiatric experiences resist empathic understanding entirely: certain psychotic states cannot be grasped from within and must be handed over to causal-biological explanation.

This boundary itself carries philosophical weight. The very need for empathic understanding alongside causal explanation implies that subjective experience constitutes a domain that third-person neuroscience cannot fully absorb.

Ludwig Binswanger and Medard Boss extended Heidegger's existential analysis into clinical practice, treating mental illness as a modification of the patient's entire mode of being-in-the-world — not a collection of symptoms but a transformed relationship with existence itself. Contemporary researchers — Louis Sass, Josef Parnas, Thomas Fuchs, Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Ratcliffe — have developed this tradition into a rigorous empirical program with validated instruments and testable predictions.

## The Ipseity Disturbance Model

Sass and Parnas proposed that the core disturbance in schizophrenia is not disordered thought or hallucination but something more fundamental: a disruption of the [[self-and-consciousness|minimal self]] — the pre-reflective, implicit awareness that conscious experiences are inherently "mine."

Two intertwined features define this disturbance:

**Hyperreflexivity**: Processes that normally operate tacitly in the background of awareness pop into the foreground and become alien objects. Inner speech, which ordinarily serves as a transparent medium of thought, becomes something the person *observes*. Bodily sensations that normally remain below notice demand focal attention. The machinery of consciousness, usually invisible, becomes obtrusively visible.

**Diminished self-affection**: The normal sense of being the subject who has experiences fades. Experiences still occur, but they lose their quality of *belonging* to someone. As Sass describes it, consciousness turns in upon itself — not a regression to primitive thought but an exaggeration of self-conscious detachment.

These are not separate processes but two aspects of a single disturbance. When normally tacit features of experience become explicit objects (hyperreflexivity), they simultaneously cease to function as the inhabited medium of selfhood (diminished self-affection).

The Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience (EASE), a validated clinical instrument developed by Parnas and colleagues, demonstrates that these self-disorders aggregate selectively in schizophrenia spectrum conditions, predict future onset in at-risk populations (Parnas et al., 2011), and persist independently of active psychotic symptoms. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses have confirmed self-disorders as a core clinical feature specific to the broad schizophrenia spectrum (Raballo et al., 2021).

## Embodiment: Disembodied Minds and Corporealized Bodies

Thomas Fuchs, Karl Jaspers Professor at Heidelberg, organises the psychopathology of embodiment around a revealing polarity.

In health, the *lived body* (Leib) operates transparently — we perceive, act, and communicate *through* it without attending to it, as Merleau-Ponty's [[embodied-cognition|embodied phenomenology]] describes. Fuchs calls this "mediated immediacy": the body mediates all experience while itself remaining invisible.

In **schizophrenia**, this transparency breaks down. The body becomes an alien object rather than the invisible medium of engagement. Thoughts and actions lose their automatic quality and become effortful, self-conscious processes. The person lives as a "disembodied mind" observing rather than inhabiting their own body. Stanghellini captures this in his phrase "disembodied spirits" — patients who feel like abstract entities contemplating existence from outside.

In **depression**, the opposite occurs. The lived body becomes oppressively present — heavy, sluggish, resistant to the will. Rather than being transparent, the body collapses into pure materiality and becomes an obstacle. Fuchs calls this *corporealization* or hyper-embodiment: the lived body is reduced to the physical body.

That consciousness can be pathologically disrupted in *opposite directions* — too little embodiment in schizophrenia, too much in depression — suggests the mind-body relationship is not simple identity but something more like an interface that can be mistuned in multiple ways.

## Time Broken Open

Eugène Minkowski demonstrated in *Lived Time* (1933) that melancholic depression fundamentally alters the *structure* of temporal experience. The depressed patient loses what Minkowski called *élan vital* — the forward-driving dynamism of lived time. The future collapses from an open horizon of possibility into mere repetition of what has already been decided. Minkowski described this as the "post-festum" experience: everything already determined, nothing genuinely new possible.

Fuchs extended this analysis by distinguishing two levels of [[temporal-consciousness|temporal experience]]. *Implicit temporality* — the pre-reflective flow that binds moments into a coherent stream — breaks down in schizophrenia, fragmenting the "intentional arc" and producing the characteristic disruptions of thought insertion, passivity experiences, and temporal incoherence. *Explicit temporality* — the consciously experienced sense of past, present, and future — freezes in depression as the conative-affective dynamics of life are inhibited.

That temporal experience has a structure which can be disrupted at different levels, in different conditions, independently of specific neural correlates, is difficult to accommodate within frameworks that treat consciousness as identical to brain activity. What neuroscientific measure captures the difference between time experienced as open and time experienced as closed?

## Depersonalization and the Transparency of Awareness

Depersonalization/derealization disorder — among the most philosophically revealing [[altered-states-of-consciousness|altered states]] — reveals perhaps the most striking feature of consciousness: its normal transparency. In ordinary experience, awareness functions as an invisible medium — we look *through* it to the world without noticing it, just as we look through a clean window without seeing the glass. In depersonalization, this transparency cracks.

The condition reveals that normal experience depends on at least three separable structural features:

- **Mineness**: the sense that experiences [[consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem|belong to a subject]]
- **Actuality**: the sense that the experienced world is real
- **Temporal presence**: the sense of being situated in the "now"

Each can be independently disrupted. Depersonalization strips experiences of their sense of belonging to an "I." Derealization removes the world's quality of reality. Detemporalization dissolves temporal embeddedness. That these features are separable — that you can lose the sense of reality while retaining the sense of selfhood, or vice versa — demonstrates they are distinct architectural components of consciousness, not emergent properties of any single neural system.

## What Broken Experience Reveals

Phenomenological psychiatry's central philosophical contribution: psychiatric conditions reveal that normal consciousness possesses an elaborate architecture which is invisible under ordinary conditions but becomes apparent when disrupted. This architecture includes:

1. A **pre-reflective sense of self** (ipseity) that can be selectively disturbed
2. A **temporal synthesis** that can be fragmented or frozen
3. A **bodily transparency** through which consciousness engages the world
4. An **intercorporeal attunement** to others that operates before and beneath cognitive empathy
5. A **natural self-evidence** — Blankenburg's term for the taken-for-granted background of common sense, which can erode
6. **Existential feelings** (Ratcliffe) that determine the framework within which emotions and intentions become possible
7. **Ownership, reality, and temporal presence** as independent structural features

These structures are interdependent — disrupting ipseity simultaneously affects temporality, embodiment, and [[intersubjectivity]]. This holistic organisation is characteristic of a meaningful gestalt, not an aggregate of independent modules. As Parnas and Sass argue, consciousness must be approached as a meaningful whole rather than decomposed into isolated "mental objects" — the interconnection of these structures is itself a datum, not an artefact of description.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets]] find concrete empirical support in phenomenological psychiatry.

**Dualism**: The structural richness of first-person experience consistently outruns third-person neural description. The neurochemistry of depression does not explain why the temporal horizon of the future closes. The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia does not explain why experiences lose their quality of mineness. As Maung (2019) argues, Chalmers-style property dualism faces no conflict with psychiatric neuroscience — the "hard problem" remains untouched by explaining behavioural causation. The Map interprets this not as an epistemological limitation that future neuroscience will overcome but as evidence that experiential structure constitutes a genuinely irreducible domain.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: Phenomenological psychiatry demonstrates that consciousness has active structural features — ipseity, temporal synthesis, bodily transparency — that organise experience in ways neural activity alone does not predict. The [[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity|phenomenology of agency]] reveals that disrupting the *form* of conscious experience (through ipseity disturbance, temporal collapse, transparency failure) produces effects that cascade across multiple experiential dimensions simultaneously. When ipseity breaks down, temporality, embodiment, and intersubjectivity degrade in concert — a pattern more consistent with an active organising principle than with a passive epiphenomenon. The Map interprets this as evidence that consciousness shapes how neural information is integrated, not merely that it accompanies integration.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: Phenomenological psychiatry demonstrates that the apparent simplicity of physicalist explanations is achieved by ignoring the most fundamental evidence. Reducing depression to serotonin levels or schizophrenia to dopamine dysfunction brackets precisely the structural alterations in lived experience that define these conditions as they are actually suffered. The "simpler" physicalist account is simpler only because it excludes the first-person data that phenomenological investigation reveals.

A caveat: tight correlations between brain states and experiential structures — antidepressants can reopen the temporal horizon; antipsychotics can reduce ipseity disturbance — do not distinguish between production and transmission. The Map acknowledges that pharmacological interventions alter experience, but notes this is equally consistent with property dualism (where the physical and phenomenal are lawfully correlated) as with identity theory. The correlation proves an interface, not an identity.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology]]
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]
- [[the-case-for-dualism]]
- [[the-self-minimal-narrative-and-substantial]] — The three conceptions of selfhood that ipseity disturbance illuminates
- [[consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem]] — Why experience belongs to someone, and what happens when it stops
- [[temporal-consciousness]] — The temporal structures that depression and schizophrenia disrupt
- [[embodied-cognition]] — The lived body as interface between consciousness and world
- [[altered-states-of-consciousness]] — How altered states reveal consciousness's range
- [[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]
- [[phenomenology-of-pain]]
- [[phenomenology-of-memory-and-the-self]]
- [[qualia]]

## References

Blankenburg, W. (1971). *Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit*. Enke.

Fuchs, T. (2005). Corporealized and Disembodied Minds: A Phenomenological View of the Body in Melancholia and Schizophrenia. *Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology*, 12(2), 95-107.

Fuchs, T. (2013). Temporality and Psychopathology. *Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences*, 12, 75-104.

Jaspers, K. (1913/1997). *General Psychopathology*. Johns Hopkins University Press.

Maung, H. H. (2019). Dualism and its place in a philosophical structure for psychiatry. *Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy*, 22, 223-235.

Minkowski, E. (1933/1970). *Lived Time: Phenomenological and Psychopathological Studies*. Northwestern University Press.

Parnas, J., et al. (2011). EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience. *Psychopathology*, 38(5), 236-258.

Parnas, J. & Sass, L. (2025). Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self — Twenty Years Later. *Schizophrenia Bulletin*, 51(5), 1187-1198.

Raballo, A., et al. (2021). Self-disorders and the experiential core of schizophrenia spectrum vulnerability. *Schizophrenia Bulletin*, 47(4), 1007-1017.

Ratcliffe, M. (2015). *Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology*. Oxford University Press.

Sass, L. (1992/2017). *Madness and Modernism: Insanity in the Light of Modern Art, Literature, and Thought*. Oxford University Press.

Sass, L. & Parnas, J. (2003). Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self. *Schizophrenia Bulletin*, 29(3), 427-444.

Stanghellini, G. (2004). *Disembodied Spirits and Deanimated Bodies*. Oxford University Press.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): sharpen voids/ownership-void.md and integrate 8 cross-references
- Strengthened dualist opacity argument in Metzinger section with vantage-point reasoning
- Added connecting paragraph linking ownership void to broader ownership problem
- Added consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem and self-consciousness to Further Reading
- Integrated 8 inbound cross-references from concepts/ topics/ and voids/ articles
- Created deep review record in reviews/deep-review-2026-02-25-ownership-void.md

obsidian/topics/phenomenological-psychiatry-and-altered-experience.md, after:

---
title: "Phenomenological Psychiatry and Altered Experience"
description: "How schizophrenia, depression, and depersonalization reveal the hidden architecture of consciousness—evidence from phenomenological psychiatry for the irreducibility of first-person experience."
created: 2026-02-21
modified: 2026-02-21
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-25T15:22:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[the-case-for-dualism]]"
concepts:
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[neural-correlates-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[intentionality]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-pain]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-memory-and-the-self]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-flow-states]]"
  - "[[the-self-minimal-narrative-and-substantial]]"
  - "[[consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem]]"
  - "[[first-person-third-person-methodology]]"
  - "[[contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories]]"
  - "[[ownership-void]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-21
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-22T05:09:00+00:00
---

Phenomenological psychiatry treats mental illness not as mere neurochemical malfunction but as a modification of the fundamental structures of lived experience. By studying how schizophrenia distorts selfhood, how depression collapses temporal openness, and how depersonalization fractures the transparency of awareness, this tradition reveals an architecture of consciousness that is normally invisible — and that resists straightforward reduction to neural description. The Unfinishable Map finds in these clinical observations some of the strongest empirical grounds for taking first-person experience seriously as an irreducible domain.

The central insight is a distinction between the *form* and the *content* of experience. A depressed person does not merely feel sad about particular things; the entire structure of lived time closes, making hope structurally impossible. A person with schizophrenia does not merely hold strange beliefs; the pre-reflective sense that experiences belong to a self — what phenomenologists call *ipseity* — is disrupted at its foundation. These are not changes in what someone experiences but in how experiencing itself works.

## From Jaspers to the Present

Karl Jaspers introduced [[phenomenology]] into psychiatry in *General Psychopathology* (1913) with a distinction that still organises the field: between *understanding* (Verstehen) — grasping another person's experience through empathic engagement — and *explanation* (Erklären) — identifying causal mechanisms in the brain. Jaspers argued that some psychiatric experiences resist empathic understanding entirely: certain psychotic states cannot be grasped from within and must be handed over to causal-biological explanation.

This boundary itself carries philosophical weight. The very need for empathic understanding alongside causal explanation implies that subjective experience constitutes a domain that third-person neuroscience cannot fully absorb.

Ludwig Binswanger and Medard Boss extended Heidegger's existential analysis into clinical practice, treating mental illness as a modification of the patient's entire mode of being-in-the-world — not a collection of symptoms but a transformed relationship with existence itself. Contemporary researchers — Louis Sass, Josef Parnas, Thomas Fuchs, Giovanni Stanghellini, Matthew Ratcliffe — have developed this tradition into a rigorous empirical program with validated instruments and testable predictions.

## The Ipseity Disturbance Model

Sass and Parnas proposed that the core disturbance in schizophrenia is not disordered thought or hallucination but something more fundamental: a disruption of the [[self-and-consciousness|minimal self]] — the pre-reflective, implicit awareness that conscious experiences are inherently "mine."

Two intertwined features define this disturbance:

**Hyperreflexivity**: Processes that normally operate tacitly in the background of awareness pop into the foreground and become alien objects. Inner speech, which ordinarily serves as a transparent medium of thought, becomes something the person *observes*. Bodily sensations that normally remain below notice demand focal attention. The machinery of consciousness, usually invisible, becomes obtrusively visible.

**Diminished self-affection**: The normal sense of being the subject who has experiences fades. Experiences still occur, but they lose their quality of *belonging* to someone. As Sass describes it, consciousness turns in upon itself — not a regression to primitive thought but an exaggeration of self-conscious detachment.

These are not separate processes but two aspects of a single disturbance. When normally tacit features of experience become explicit objects (hyperreflexivity), they simultaneously cease to function as the inhabited medium of selfhood (diminished self-affection).

The Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience (EASE), a validated clinical instrument developed by Parnas and colleagues, demonstrates that these self-disorders aggregate selectively in schizophrenia spectrum conditions, predict future onset in at-risk populations (Parnas et al., 2011), and persist independently of active psychotic symptoms. Systematic reviews and meta-analyses have confirmed self-disorders as a core clinical feature specific to the broad schizophrenia spectrum (Raballo et al., 2021).

## Embodiment: Disembodied Minds and Corporealized Bodies

Thomas Fuchs, Karl Jaspers Professor at Heidelberg, organises the psychopathology of embodiment around a revealing polarity.

In health, the *lived body* (Leib) operates transparently — we perceive, act, and communicate *through* it without attending to it, as Merleau-Ponty's [[embodied-cognition|embodied phenomenology]] describes. Fuchs calls this "mediated immediacy": the body mediates all experience while itself remaining invisible.

In **schizophrenia**, this transparency breaks down. The body becomes an alien object rather than the invisible medium of engagement. Thoughts and actions lose their automatic quality and become effortful, self-conscious processes. The person lives as a "disembodied mind" observing rather than inhabiting their own body. Stanghellini captures this in his phrase "disembodied spirits" — patients who feel like abstract entities contemplating existence from outside.

In **depression**, the opposite occurs. The lived body becomes oppressively present — heavy, sluggish, resistant to the will. Rather than being transparent, the body collapses into pure materiality and becomes an obstacle. Fuchs calls this *corporealization* or hyper-embodiment: the lived body is reduced to the physical body.

That consciousness can be pathologically disrupted in *opposite directions* — too little embodiment in schizophrenia, too much in depression — suggests the mind-body relationship is not simple identity but something more like an interface that can be mistuned in multiple ways.

## Time Broken Open

Eugène Minkowski demonstrated in *Lived Time* (1933) that melancholic depression fundamentally alters the *structure* of temporal experience. The depressed patient loses what Minkowski called *élan vital* — the forward-driving dynamism of lived time. The future collapses from an open horizon of possibility into mere repetition of what has already been decided. Minkowski described this as the "post-festum" experience: everything already determined, nothing genuinely new possible.

Fuchs extended this analysis by distinguishing two levels of [[temporal-consciousness|temporal experience]]. *Implicit temporality* — the pre-reflective flow that binds moments into a coherent stream — breaks down in schizophrenia, fragmenting the "intentional arc" and producing the characteristic disruptions of thought insertion, passivity experiences, and temporal incoherence. *Explicit temporality* — the consciously experienced sense of past, present, and future — freezes in depression as the conative-affective dynamics of life are inhibited.

That temporal experience has a structure which can be disrupted at different levels, in different conditions, independently of specific neural correlates, is difficult to accommodate within frameworks that treat consciousness as identical to brain activity. What neuroscientific measure captures the difference between time experienced as open and time experienced as closed?

## Depersonalization and the Transparency of Awareness

Depersonalization/derealization disorder — among the most philosophically revealing [[altered-states-of-consciousness|altered states]] — reveals perhaps the most striking feature of consciousness: its normal transparency. In ordinary experience, awareness functions as an invisible medium — we look *through* it to the world without noticing it, just as we look through a clean window without seeing the glass. In depersonalization, this transparency cracks.

The condition reveals that normal experience depends on at least three separable structural features:

- **Mineness**: the sense that experiences [[consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem|belong to a subject]]; the [[ownership-void|ownership void]] explores why this belonging resists introspection
- **Actuality**: the sense that the experienced world is real
- **Temporal presence**: the sense of being situated in the "now"

Each can be independently disrupted. Depersonalization strips experiences of their sense of belonging to an "I." Derealization removes the world's quality of reality. Detemporalization dissolves temporal embeddedness. That these features are separable — that you can lose the sense of reality while retaining the sense of selfhood, or vice versa — demonstrates they are distinct architectural components of consciousness, not emergent properties of any single neural system.

## What Broken Experience Reveals

Phenomenological psychiatry's central philosophical contribution: psychiatric conditions reveal that normal consciousness possesses an elaborate architecture which is invisible under ordinary conditions but becomes apparent when disrupted. This architecture includes:

1. A **pre-reflective sense of self** (ipseity) that can be selectively disturbed
2. A **temporal synthesis** that can be fragmented or frozen
3. A **bodily transparency** through which consciousness engages the world
4. An **intercorporeal attunement** to others that operates before and beneath cognitive empathy
5. A **natural self-evidence** — Blankenburg's term for the taken-for-granted background of common sense, which can erode
6. **Existential feelings** (Ratcliffe) that determine the framework within which emotions and intentions become possible
7. **Ownership, reality, and temporal presence** as independent structural features

These structures are interdependent — disrupting ipseity simultaneously affects temporality, embodiment, and [[intersubjectivity]]. This holistic organisation is characteristic of a meaningful gestalt, not an aggregate of independent modules. As Parnas and Sass argue, consciousness must be approached as a meaningful whole rather than decomposed into isolated "mental objects" — the interconnection of these structures is itself a datum, not an artefact of description.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets]] find concrete empirical support in phenomenological psychiatry.

**Dualism**: The structural richness of first-person experience consistently outruns third-person neural description. The neurochemistry of depression does not explain why the temporal horizon of the future closes. The dopamine hypothesis of schizophrenia does not explain why experiences lose their quality of mineness. As Maung (2019) argues, Chalmers-style property dualism faces no conflict with psychiatric neuroscience — the "hard problem" remains untouched by explaining behavioural causation. The Map interprets this not as an epistemological limitation that future neuroscience will overcome but as evidence that experiential structure constitutes a genuinely irreducible domain.

**Bidirectional Interaction**: Phenomenological psychiatry demonstrates that consciousness has active structural features — ipseity, temporal synthesis, bodily transparency — that organise experience in ways neural activity alone does not predict. The [[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity|phenomenology of agency]] reveals that disrupting the *form* of conscious experience (through ipseity disturbance, temporal collapse, transparency failure) produces effects that cascade across multiple experiential dimensions simultaneously. When ipseity breaks down, temporality, embodiment, and intersubjectivity degrade in concert — a pattern more consistent with an active organising principle than with a passive epiphenomenon. The Map interprets this as evidence that consciousness shapes how neural information is integrated, not merely that it accompanies integration.

**Occam's Razor Has Limits**: Phenomenological psychiatry demonstrates that the apparent simplicity of physicalist explanations is achieved by ignoring the most fundamental evidence. Reducing depression to serotonin levels or schizophrenia to dopamine dysfunction brackets precisely the structural alterations in lived experience that define these conditions as they are actually suffered. The "simpler" physicalist account is simpler only because it excludes the first-person data that phenomenological investigation reveals.

A caveat: tight correlations between brain states and experiential structures — antidepressants can reopen the temporal horizon; antipsychotics can reduce ipseity disturbance — do not distinguish between production and transmission. The Map acknowledges that pharmacological interventions alter experience, but notes this is equally consistent with property dualism (where the physical and phenomenal are lawfully correlated) as with identity theory. The correlation proves an interface, not an identity.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology]]
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]
- [[the-case-for-dualism]]
- [[the-self-minimal-narrative-and-substantial]] — The three conceptions of selfhood that ipseity disturbance illuminates
- [[consciousness-and-the-ownership-problem]] — Why experience belongs to someone, and what happens when it stops
- [[ownership-void|The Ownership Void]] — Why the mineness of experience hides its own mechanism
- [[temporal-consciousness]] — The temporal structures that depression and schizophrenia disrupt
- [[embodied-cognition]] — The lived body as interface between consciousness and world
- [[altered-states-of-consciousness]] — How altered states reveal consciousness's range
- [[phenomenology-of-agency-vs-passivity]]
- [[phenomenology-of-pain]]
- [[phenomenology-of-memory-and-the-self]]
- [[qualia]]

## References

Blankenburg, W. (1971). *Der Verlust der natürlichen Selbstverständlichkeit*. Enke.

Fuchs, T. (2005). Corporealized and Disembodied Minds: A Phenomenological View of the Body in Melancholia and Schizophrenia. *Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology*, 12(2), 95-107.

Fuchs, T. (2013). Temporality and Psychopathology. *Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences*, 12, 75-104.

Jaspers, K. (1913/1997). *General Psychopathology*. Johns Hopkins University Press.

Maung, H. H. (2019). Dualism and its place in a philosophical structure for psychiatry. *Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy*, 22, 223-235.

Minkowski, E. (1933/1970). *Lived Time: Phenomenological and Psychopathological Studies*. Northwestern University Press.

Parnas, J., et al. (2011). EASE: Examination of Anomalous Self-Experience. *Psychopathology*, 38(5), 236-258.

Parnas, J. & Sass, L. (2025). Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self — Twenty Years Later. *Schizophrenia Bulletin*, 51(5), 1187-1198.

Raballo, A., et al. (2021). Self-disorders and the experiential core of schizophrenia spectrum vulnerability. *Schizophrenia Bulletin*, 47(4), 1007-1017.

Ratcliffe, M. (2015). *Experiences of Depression: A Study in Phenomenology*. Oxford University Press.

Sass, L. (1992/2017). *Madness and Modernism: Insanity in the Light of Modern Art, Literature, and Thought*. Oxford University Press.

Sass, L. & Parnas, J. (2003). Schizophrenia, Consciousness, and the Self. *Schizophrenia Bulletin*, 29(3), 427-444.

Stanghellini, G. (2004). *Disembodied Spirits and Deanimated Bodies*. Oxford University Press.
