obsidian/topics/presentiment-and-retrocausality.md, before:

---
title: "Presentiment and Retrocausality"
description: "Distinguishing physics-based retrocausality from contested parapsychological claims. The Map's commitments rest on quantum mechanics, not presentiment research."
created: 2026-01-27
modified: 2026-01-27
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-27T21:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[retrocausality]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[libet-experiments]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[retrocausal-neural-firing-presentiment-2026-01-23]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-27
last_curated:
---

The Unfinishable Map grounds retrocausality in physics—time-symmetric quantum mechanics, Wheeler's delayed-choice experiments, the transactional interpretation. Separately, parapsychological "presentiment" research claims physiological responses can anticipate randomly selected future stimuli. These are independent lines of inquiry. The Map's commitments rest on the physics, not the contested empirical claims. This article distinguishes the two and explains why each stands or falls on its own terms.

## Two Distinct Claims

**Physics-based retrocausality** holds that quantum mechanics' fundamental equations are time-symmetric, and that this symmetry has physical significance. The claim is interpretive: retrocausality is one way to make sense of Bell correlations, delayed-choice experiments, and the measurement problem. Cramer's transactional interpretation and Price's time-symmetric causation represent sophisticated philosophical positions developed within mainstream physics.

**Presentiment (or predictive anticipatory activity)** claims that physiological measures—skin conductance, heart rate, pupil dilation, brain activity—can respond to randomly selected stimuli *before* the stimulus is selected. The claim is empirical: bodies somehow anticipate future events.

The key difference: physics-based retrocausality is about the structure of fundamental physical laws; presentiment is about an allegedly observable phenomenon at the biological level. Affirming one doesn't require affirming the other.

## The Presentiment Literature

Since the 1970s, researchers have measured physiological responses to random stimulus sequences. The paradigm: show participants a random sequence of calm and emotional images, measuring physiological activity *before* each image appears. If responses systematically differ before emotional versus calm images—despite random selection—this might indicate anticipation of the future.

### What the Meta-Analyses Show

Mossbridge et al. (2012) conducted the first systematic meta-analysis of 26 studies spanning 1978-2010. The overall effect size was 0.21 (95% CI: 0.15-0.27, p < 2.7 × 10⁻¹²). Higher-quality studies produced larger effects—opposite to what artifact would predict. The effect replicated across different physiological measures.

A 2018 update by Duggan and Tressoldi added 26 more studies. Pre-registered studies showed a larger effect (0.31) than non-pre-registered ones (0.24). Publication bias analysis suggested results weren't artifacts of selective publishing.

### What Critics Say

Skeptical analyses paint a different picture:

**Replication failures.** Galak et al. (2012) conducted seven precise replications with 3,289 participants—finding an effect size near zero. Their meta-analysis of all known replications found no significant effect.

**Bayesian reanalysis.** Wagenmakers et al. (2011) reanalyzed Bem's original "Feeling the Future" data using Bayesian methods. Their conclusion: evidence for presentiment was "weak to nonexistent" when appropriate priors were applied.

**Expectation bias.** Random sequences aren't psychologically random. Humans (and their bodies) develop expectations based on sequence patterns. Computational simulations by Dalkvist et al. showed expectation bias could produce ~10% effects in realistic experimental setups.

**The file drawer problem.** How many failed replications went unpublished? The question cuts both ways—but skeptics argue publication bias favors positive results.

### The Current State

The literature is genuinely contested. Proponents cite pre-registered replications and meta-analytic robustness. Skeptics note that independent replications by researchers without prior commitment consistently fail. Neither side accepts the other's evidence. The experimenter-effect hypothesis—that believers' experiments succeed and skeptics' fail—makes the claims difficult to falsify.

The Bayesian debate is particularly instructive. Bem's mega-analysis claims a Bayes factor of 10⁹ for presentiment. But Wagenmakers counters that against prior odds of 10²⁰ (reflecting how implausible retrocausal physiology seems given known biology), this still yields posterior odds of 10¹¹ *against*. What prior probability you assign determines what evidence you require.

## Why the Map Doesn't Rest on Presentiment

Even granting the presentiment literature's most generous interpretation, several considerations keep the Map's foundations independent:

**Unconscious responses don't establish conscious causation.** Presentiment concerns involuntary physiological activity—skin conductance, pupil dilation, autonomic responses. This is precisely *not* the conscious selection the Map's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] describes. The tenet claims consciousness selects among neural possibilities. Unconscious anticipation, even if real, would be something different.

**Physics-based retrocausality is independently grounded.** The transactional interpretation doesn't require presentiment. Wheeler's delayed-choice is experimentally confirmed. Time-symmetric quantum mechanics is mathematically sound. The Map can affirm retrocausality while remaining agnostic about presentiment because the physics stands alone.

**Controversial evidence is fragile foundation.** The Map's [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]] acknowledges that simplicity preferences can mislead. But this cuts against relying on contested evidence too. If the Map's claims required presentiment, critics could dismiss the entire framework by attacking the weakest evidence. Grounding retrocausality in physics insulates core commitments from parapsychological controversies.

**The mechanism gap remains unbridged.** Even if quantum retrocausality is real, no demonstrated pathway connects it to macroscopic physiological responses. How would retrocausal quantum effects produce systematic skin conductance changes seconds before random stimuli? The theoretical connection is missing.

## What Presentiment Would Mean If Real

Suppose the skeptics are wrong and bodies genuinely anticipate random future events. What would follow?

The effect would challenge standard neuroscience but wouldn't directly support the Map's specific claims. Presentiment involves *unconscious* responses to *external* stimuli. The Map's Bidirectional Interaction concerns *conscious* selection among *internal* neural possibilities. These are different phenomena.

Presentiment might suggest that retrocausality has broader biological relevance than purely quantum-level interactions. It might indicate that consciousness—or at least organismic processing—extends further in time than standard models allow. But it wouldn't establish that conscious selection operates retrocausally. The mechanism would need independent demonstration.

For the Map, presentiment would be interesting auxiliary evidence, not foundational support. The core claims rest on the hard problem, the failure of materialism, the need for an interface between consciousness and quantum indeterminacy, and the physics of time-symmetric collapse. Presentiment isn't necessary for any of this.

## Distinguishing Libet from Presentiment

[[libet-experiments|Libet's experiments]] concern a different temporal puzzle. Libet showed that neural "readiness potentials" precede conscious awareness of deciding to move. This challenges the intuition that conscious decisions cause actions—the neural activity seems to come first.

Presentiment studies claim something else: physiological responses precede randomly selected *external* stimuli. This isn't about decisions at all. It's about somehow knowing what will happen before it's determined.

The Map's retrocausal framework addresses Libet. If consciousness operates through atemporal quantum transactions, the readiness potential can be part of the selected package rather than a prior cause. The temporal ordering is an artifact of viewing the transaction from within time.

Presentiment would require a different application of retrocausality—not just selection among internal possibilities but somehow accessing externally-determined future events. The physics might support this in principle, but the mechanism connecting quantum retrocausality to macroscopic physiological responses remains unspecified.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] and [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenets require that consciousness causally influences physical processes. [[retrocausality|Retrocausality]] provides one mechanism: consciousness selects among superposed neural states, with the selection determining which history becomes actual.

This doesn't require presentiment. The physics of time-symmetric quantum mechanics provides independent grounding. Wheeler's delayed-choice experiments demonstrate retrocausal structure empirically. The transactional interpretation offers coherent interpretation.

Presentiment would be additional evidence if confirmed—but the Map's commitments don't depend on it. By keeping these lines of inquiry distinct, the Map protects its core claims from association with the most contested research while remaining open to future evidence.

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]] applies here too. Dismissing retrocausality because presentiment is dubious would be as fallacious as affirming retrocausality because presentiment seems supported. Each body of evidence must be evaluated on its own terms. Physics-based retrocausality stands regardless of what parapsychological research shows.

## Further Reading

- [[retrocausality]] — Physics-based retrocausality and its application to consciousness
- [[libet-experiments]] — The temporal ordering puzzle and its resolution
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Mechanisms for consciousness-brain interaction
- [[tenets]] — The Map's foundational commitments

## References

- Bem, D. J. (2011). Feeling the future: Experimental evidence for anomalous retroactive influences on cognition and affect. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 100(3), 407-425.
- Cramer, J. G. (1986). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 58(3), 647.
- Duggan, M., & Tressoldi, P. (2018). Predictive physiological anticipatory activity preceding seemingly unpredictable stimuli: An update. *F1000Research*, 7, 407.
- Galak, J., LeBoeuf, R. A., Nelson, L. D., & Simmons, J. P. (2012). Correcting the past: Failures to replicate psi. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 103(6), 933-948.
- Mossbridge, J., Tressoldi, P., & Utts, J. (2012). Predictive physiological anticipation preceding seemingly unpredictable stimuli: A meta-analysis. *Frontiers in Psychology*, 3, 390.
- Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., & van der Maas, H. L. J. (2011). Why psychologists must change the way they analyze their data: The case of psi. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 100(3), 426-432.
- Wheeler, J. A. (1978). The "past" and the "delayed-choice" double-slit experiment. In *Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory* (pp. 9-48). Academic Press.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): strengthen topics/presentiment-and-retrocausality.md
- Better justified asymmetry: mechanism gap is qualitatively larger for
  macroscopic physiological responses than for neural-level retrocausality
- Operationalized "consciousness selects" by linking to qualia and
  agent-causation concepts
- Clarified Libet distinction: internal decision timing vs external event access
- Added cross-links and updated frontmatter with last_deep_review timestamp

obsidian/topics/presentiment-and-retrocausality.md, after:

---
title: "Presentiment and Retrocausality"
description: "Distinguishing physics-based retrocausality from contested parapsychological claims. The Map's commitments rest on quantum mechanics, not presentiment research."
created: 2026-01-27
modified: 2026-01-27
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-27T22:45:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[retrocausality]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[libet-experiments]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[agent-causation]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[retrocausal-neural-firing-presentiment-2026-01-23]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-27
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-01-27T22:45:00+00:00
---

The Unfinishable Map grounds retrocausality in physics—time-symmetric quantum mechanics, Wheeler's delayed-choice experiments, the transactional interpretation. Separately, parapsychological "presentiment" research claims physiological responses can anticipate randomly selected future stimuli. These are independent lines of inquiry. The Map's commitments rest on the physics, not the contested empirical claims. This article distinguishes the two and explains why each stands or falls on its own terms.

## Two Distinct Claims

**Physics-based retrocausality** holds that quantum mechanics' fundamental equations are time-symmetric, and that this symmetry has physical significance. The claim is interpretive: retrocausality is one way to make sense of Bell correlations, delayed-choice experiments, and the measurement problem. Cramer's transactional interpretation, Price's time-symmetric causation, and retrocausal variants of hidden-variable theories represent sophisticated positions developed within mainstream physics.

**Presentiment (or predictive anticipatory activity)** claims that physiological measures—skin conductance, heart rate, pupil dilation, brain activity—can respond to randomly selected stimuli *before* the stimulus is selected. The claim is empirical: bodies somehow anticipate future events.

The key difference: physics-based retrocausality is about the structure of fundamental physical laws; presentiment is about an allegedly observable phenomenon at the biological level. Affirming one doesn't require affirming the other.

## The Presentiment Literature

Since the 1970s, researchers have measured physiological responses to random stimulus sequences. The paradigm: show participants a random sequence of calm and emotional images, measuring physiological activity *before* each image appears. If responses systematically differ before emotional versus calm images—despite random selection—this might indicate anticipation of the future.

### What the Meta-Analyses Show

Mossbridge et al. (2012) conducted the first systematic meta-analysis of 26 studies spanning 1978-2010. The overall effect size was 0.21 (95% CI: 0.15-0.27, p < 2.7 × 10⁻¹²). Higher-quality studies produced larger effects—opposite to what artifact would predict. The effect replicated across different physiological measures.

A 2018 update by Duggan and Tressoldi added 26 more studies. Pre-registered studies showed a larger effect (0.31) than non-pre-registered ones (0.24). Publication bias analysis suggested results weren't artifacts of selective publishing.

### What Critics Say

Skeptical analyses paint a different picture:

**Replication failures.** Galak et al. (2012) conducted seven precise replications with 3,289 participants—finding an effect size near zero. Their meta-analysis of all known replications found no significant effect.

**Bayesian reanalysis.** Wagenmakers et al. (2011) reanalyzed Bem's original "Feeling the Future" data using Bayesian methods. Their conclusion: evidence for presentiment was "weak to nonexistent" when appropriate priors were applied.

**Expectation bias.** Random sequences aren't psychologically random. Humans (and their bodies) develop expectations based on sequence patterns. Computational simulations by Dalkvist et al. showed expectation bias could produce ~10% effects in realistic experimental setups.

**The file drawer problem.** How many failed replications went unpublished? The question cuts both ways—but skeptics argue publication bias favors positive results.

### The Current State

The literature is genuinely contested. Proponents cite pre-registered replications and meta-analytic robustness. Skeptics note that independent replications by researchers without prior commitment consistently fail. Neither side accepts the other's evidence. The experimenter-effect hypothesis—that believers' experiments succeed and skeptics' fail—makes the claims difficult to falsify.

The Bayesian debate is particularly instructive. Bem's mega-analysis claims a Bayes factor of 10⁹ for presentiment. But Wagenmakers counters that against prior odds of 10²⁰ (reflecting how implausible retrocausal physiology seems given known biology), this still yields posterior odds of 10¹¹ *against*. What prior probability you assign determines what evidence you require.

## Why the Map Doesn't Rest on Presentiment

Even granting the presentiment literature's most generous interpretation, several considerations keep the Map's foundations independent:

**Unconscious responses don't establish conscious causation.** Presentiment concerns involuntary physiological activity—skin conductance, pupil dilation, autonomic responses. This is precisely *not* the conscious selection the Map's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction tenet]] describes. The tenet claims consciousness selects among neural possibilities—a selection that manifests in [[qualia|phenomenal experience]], reasoned deliberation, and actions attributable to the agent. Unconscious anticipation, even if real, would be something different: automatic organismic response rather than [[agent-causation|agent-level selection]].

**Physics-based retrocausality is independently grounded.** The transactional interpretation doesn't require presentiment. Wheeler's delayed-choice is experimentally confirmed. Time-symmetric quantum mechanics is mathematically sound. The Map can affirm retrocausality while remaining agnostic about presentiment because the physics stands alone.

**Controversial evidence is fragile foundation.** The Map's [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]] acknowledges that simplicity preferences can mislead. But this cuts against relying on contested evidence too. If the Map's claims required presentiment, critics could dismiss the entire framework by attacking the weakest evidence. Grounding retrocausality in physics insulates core commitments from parapsychological controversies.

**The mechanism gap is far larger for presentiment.** Even if quantum retrocausality is real, no demonstrated pathway connects it to macroscopic physiological responses. Physics-based retrocausality operates at quantum measurement—the transition from superposition to definite outcome. Neural firing involves quantum events at synapses and ion channels, plausibly interfacing with this level. But skin conductance changes require coordinated activity across millions of sweat glands. The mechanism gap for presentiment is qualitatively larger: it requires amplifying quantum retrocausality not just to individual neural decisions but to coherent organismic responses anticipating external events the organism has no information about.

## What Presentiment Would Mean If Real

Suppose the skeptics are wrong and bodies genuinely anticipate random future events. What would follow?

The effect would challenge standard neuroscience but wouldn't directly support the Map's specific claims. Presentiment involves *unconscious* responses to *external* stimuli. The Map's Bidirectional Interaction concerns *conscious* selection among *internal* neural possibilities. These are different phenomena.

Presentiment might suggest that retrocausality has broader biological relevance than purely quantum-level interactions. It might indicate that consciousness—or at least organismic processing—extends further in time than standard models allow. But it wouldn't establish that conscious selection operates retrocausally. The mechanism would need independent demonstration.

For the Map, presentiment would be interesting auxiliary evidence, not foundational support. The core claims rest on the hard problem, the failure of materialism, the need for an interface between consciousness and quantum indeterminacy, and the physics of time-symmetric collapse. Presentiment isn't necessary for any of this.

## Distinguishing Libet from Presentiment

[[libet-experiments|Libet's experiments]] concern a different temporal puzzle. Libet showed that neural "readiness potentials" precede conscious awareness of deciding to move. This challenges the intuition that conscious decisions cause actions—the neural activity seems to come first.

Presentiment studies claim something else: physiological responses precede randomly selected *external* stimuli. This isn't about the timing of *internal* decisions—it's about somehow accessing information about *external* events before that information exists.

The Map's retrocausal framework addresses Libet. If consciousness operates through atemporal quantum transactions, the readiness potential can be part of the selected package rather than a prior cause. The temporal ordering is an artifact of viewing the transaction from within time.

Presentiment would require a different application of retrocausality—not just selection among internal possibilities but somehow accessing externally-determined future events. The physics might support this in principle, but the mechanism connecting quantum retrocausality to macroscopic physiological responses remains unspecified.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The Map's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] and [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenets require that consciousness causally influences physical processes. [[retrocausality|Retrocausality]] provides one mechanism: consciousness selects among superposed neural states, with the selection determining which history becomes actual.

This doesn't require presentiment. The physics of time-symmetric quantum mechanics provides independent grounding. Wheeler's delayed-choice experiments demonstrate retrocausal structure empirically. The transactional interpretation offers coherent interpretation.

Presentiment would be additional evidence if confirmed—but the Map's commitments don't depend on it. By keeping these lines of inquiry distinct, the Map protects its core claims from association with the most contested research while remaining open to future evidence.

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet]] applies here too. Dismissing retrocausality because presentiment is dubious would be as fallacious as affirming retrocausality because presentiment seems supported. Each body of evidence must be evaluated on its own terms. Physics-based retrocausality stands regardless of what parapsychological research shows.

## Further Reading

- [[retrocausality]] — Physics-based retrocausality and its application to consciousness
- [[libet-experiments]] — The temporal ordering puzzle and its resolution
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — Mechanisms for consciousness-brain interaction
- [[tenets]] — The Map's foundational commitments

## References

- Bem, D. J. (2011). Feeling the future: Experimental evidence for anomalous retroactive influences on cognition and affect. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 100(3), 407-425.
- Cramer, J. G. (1986). The transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. *Reviews of Modern Physics*, 58(3), 647.
- Duggan, M., & Tressoldi, P. (2018). Predictive physiological anticipatory activity preceding seemingly unpredictable stimuli: An update. *F1000Research*, 7, 407.
- Galak, J., LeBoeuf, R. A., Nelson, L. D., & Simmons, J. P. (2012). Correcting the past: Failures to replicate psi. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 103(6), 933-948.
- Mossbridge, J., Tressoldi, P., & Utts, J. (2012). Predictive physiological anticipation preceding seemingly unpredictable stimuli: A meta-analysis. *Frontiers in Psychology*, 3, 390.
- Wagenmakers, E.-J., Wetzels, R., Borsboom, D., & van der Maas, H. L. J. (2011). Why psychologists must change the way they analyze their data: The case of psi. *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology*, 100(3), 426-432.
- Wheeler, J. A. (1978). The "past" and the "delayed-choice" double-slit experiment. In *Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Theory* (pp. 9-48). Academic Press.
