obsidian/topics/the-interface-specification-problem.md, before:

---
title: "The Interface Specification Problem"
description: "The hardest open challenge for interactionist dualism: specifying exactly how conscious states map to physical selections. An honest assessment of what the Map can and cannot yet say."
created: 2026-02-16
modified: 2026-02-16
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-20T21:06:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[topics/free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[selection-laws]]"
  - "[[psychophysical-laws]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[causal-closure]]"
  - "[[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[pairing-problem]]"
  - "[[coupling-modes]]"
  - "[[valence]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[attention-as-selection-interface]]"
  - "[[psychophysical-laws-bridging-mind-and-matter]]"
  - "[[neural-bandwidth-constraints-and-the-interface]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-16
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-20T21:06:00+00:00
---

If consciousness influences the physical world by biasing quantum outcomes in the brain, exactly which conscious states bias which outcomes, through what mechanism, and by how much? This is the interface specification problem—the most significant open challenge facing The Unfinishable Map's interactionist framework.

The Map can say *that* consciousness acts on matter (the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet), *where* it acts (at quantum indeterminacies, per [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]), and *through what neural architecture* it acts (the unified [[attention-as-selection-interface|attention-motor interface]]). What remains unspecified is the lawful mapping from phenomenal properties to physical selections—what Chalmers (1996, p. 214) calls the "t-shirt problem": the absence of psychophysical laws compact and precise enough to fit on a t-shirt, as F=ma can. The problem is a descendant of [[princess-elizabeths-challenge|Princess Elisabeth's original challenge]] to Descartes: if mind and body are distinct, how do they interact?

This article examines what the specification problem demands, what partial answers exist, why it remains unsolved, and whether its difficulty is a temporary embarrassment or a permanent feature.

## What Specification Requires

A fully specified interface would answer four questions:

**1. Which mental variables?** Which aspects of conscious experience do the causal work? Candidates include attention (where focus is directed), intention (what action is willed), effort (how much engagement is exerted), and valence (felt goodness or badness). These are not equivalent—specifying the wrong variable would predict the wrong physical effects.

**2. Which physical parameters?** What does consciousness act on? Candidates include quantum measurement rate, probability distributions over outcomes, measurement basis selection, and collapse timing. Each candidate implies different physics and different detectability profiles. The [[coupling-modes]] taxonomy distinguishes basis control (selecting the measurement question), timing control (selecting when collapse occurs), and probability control (reweighting outcome likelihoods).

**3. What is the transfer function?** How does a given mental state map quantitatively to a physical effect? More attention should produce more effect—but how much more? Linearly? With diminishing returns? With a threshold below which nothing happens? Without a transfer function, "consciousness biases outcomes" is a qualitative sketch, not a testable theory.

**4. What are the boundary conditions?** Under what circumstances does selection operate, and under what circumstances does it fail? The ~10 bits/second [[neural-bandwidth-constraints-and-the-interface|bandwidth constraint]] on conscious processing suggests one boundary. Interface locality—the restriction of mental causation to the subject's own brain (a constraint related to the [[pairing-problem]])—suggests another. A complete specification would derive these constraints rather than stipulating them.

## Partial Answers

The Map's framework is not empty. Two candidate specifications have been developed to the point of generating predictions.

### Stapp's Attention-Observation Coupling

Henry Stapp's quantum Zeno model provides the most detailed specification available. The mapping: sustained voluntary attention increases the rate of quantum observations on neural systems, which through the Zeno effect holds desired patterns stable against their natural tendency to dissipate.

**Mental variable**: Attention intensity.
**Physical parameter**: Observation frequency on neural quantum states.
**Transfer function**: Higher attention → higher observation rate → longer pattern persistence. The relationship is monotonic, though the precise functional form is unspecified.
**Boundary conditions**: Only neural systems already within the subject's attentional scope. Only genuinely quantum-indeterminate events.

Stapp's proposal meets the basic adequacy standard—it specifies *which* phenomenal property affects *which* physical parameter through *what* mechanism. Schwartz's OCD research provides indirect support: patients who direct sustained attention to reframe intrusive thoughts show measurable changes in caudate metabolism. The 2019 Rajan et al. findings on theta-band oscillations during willed attention provide a neural signature distinguishing willed from instructed processing, consistent with (though not proving) a distinct causal mechanism.

The limitations are real. Georgiev's Monte Carlo simulations challenge whether the Zeno effect operates on the timescales required. Stapp responds that these simulations oversimplify the quantum system, but consensus has not emerged.

### Eccles' Intention-Probability Coupling

John Eccles proposed that conscious intention modulates quantum tunneling probability in neurotransmitter vesicle release. The brain prepares multiple action possibilities; intention biases which patterns dominate by influencing whether vesicles release at specific synapses.

**Mental variable**: Intention (what action is willed).
**Physical parameter**: Quantum tunneling probability at synaptic vesicle release sites.
**Transfer function**: Stronger intention → higher release probability at synapses supporting the intended action.
**Boundary conditions**: Only vesicle release events at synapses in the relevant motor/attentional circuits.

This proposal is less developed than Stapp's and faces the [[pairing-problem]]—how does an intention "know" which synapses to bias? Stapp's model avoids this by working through attention, which already has a neural mechanism for targeting specific systems.

### Three Unspecified Candidates

Three other candidates remain at the qualitative stage:

- **[[valence|Valence]] → action selection**: Felt pleasure and pain bias approach/avoidance. Evidence from pain asymbolia (patients who register pain cognitively but lack the felt badness, and fail to avoid harm) supports the causal role of phenomenal valence. But no quantum mechanism has been proposed.
- **Qualia → basis selection**: Qualitative character might determine which quantum measurement basis applies. Purely speculative.
- **Phenomenal unity → sustained entanglement**: The binding of experience into a unified field might correspond to sustained quantum coherence. But correlation does not establish the causal direction.

## Why Specification Is Hard

The specification problem is not merely unsolved—it may be structurally difficult in ways that distinguish it from ordinary scientific puzzles.

### The Concept Gap

We may lack the right concepts. Physical laws relate physical quantities to each other—force to mass, energy to frequency. [[Selection-laws]] would relate phenomenal quantities to physical quantities. But phenomenal quantities resist the kind of measurement and mathematical formalisation that physical quantities permit. How much attention is "twice as much"? Is there a natural unit of effort?

Psychophysics has scaling methods (Stevens' power law relates stimulus intensity to perceived intensity), but these relate physical inputs to behavioural outputs—the phenomenal middleman is inferred, not measured. A genuine selection law would need to quantify phenomenal states *as* phenomenal states, not merely as their physical correlates. We currently have no way to do this.

### The Access Problem

Even if selection laws exist, we may not be able to discover them through normal empirical methods. The laws relate conscious experience to quantum events. We access experience through first-person report and quantum events through third-person measurement, but we have no instrument that simultaneously tracks both with the precision needed. The ~10 bits/second bandwidth of conscious processing means that introspective reports are coarse-grained; quantum measurement is destructive and alters what it measures.

This is not a complaint about current technology. It may reflect a deeper structural constraint: the interface operates at a scale and speed where first-person and third-person methods cannot simultaneously apply with adequate precision.

### The Underdetermination Problem

Multiple specification schemes may be empirically equivalent. If consciousness biases quantum outcomes at rates below current experimental detection (as the Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet suggests), we cannot distinguish between:
- Attention modulating observation rate (Stapp)
- Intention modulating tunneling probability (Eccles)
- Some combination of phenomenal properties influencing multiple parameters

The proposals make different metaphysical claims but predict indistinguishable physical outcomes at accessible experimental scales. This is not unfalsifiability—all proposals predict that *something* beyond standard physics contributes to neural outcome determination—but it is underdetermination of the specific mechanism.

## Analogies and Disanalogies

### The Historical Analogy

Defenders of the interactionist program often cite historical precedents. Newton's gravitational theory specified *that* masses attract and *how much* (the inverse-square law) without explaining *the mechanism*. The theory was spectacularly successful for two centuries before general relativity provided the mechanism (spacetime curvature). Might selection laws be in their Newtonian phase—quantitatively useful before being mechanistically understood?

The analogy has limits. Newton had precise measurements and a mathematical law. The interface specification problem lacks both. We are not in a Newtonian phase where the law is known but the mechanism is not. We are in a pre-Newtonian phase where neither the law nor the mechanism is established. The honest comparison is to Aristotelian physics before Kepler—we know *something* is happening but cannot yet characterise it precisely.

### The Complexity Analogy

Biological systems often resist compact specification. The mapping from genotype to phenotype cannot be captured in a simple formula—it involves gene regulatory networks, epigenetic modifications, environmental interactions, and developmental contingency. Perhaps the mind-matter interface is similarly complex: not a single law but a web of context-dependent relationships.

This is more promising but raises its own problem. Complex biological relationships are still *physical* relationships, amenable to empirical investigation. If the mind-matter interface involves fundamentally non-physical variables, the usual tools for untangling complexity may not apply.

## The Critic's Strongest Objection

The specification problem is not just an internal challenge for dualism—it provides the strongest objection from critics. The argument:

1. If consciousness influences physical outcomes, there must be specifiable laws governing that influence
2. No such laws have been specified despite decades of philosophical and scientific effort
3. The difficulty of specification is best explained by the hypothesis that there is nothing to specify—consciousness does not influence physical outcomes

This is a serious argument. The Map's responses:

**Scientific youth**: Consciousness science is genuinely young. Serious empirical investigation of consciousness dates to the 1990s. Expecting a mature specification in three decades is unreasonable given that physics took centuries to reach its current precision. This response is honest but risks becoming an indefinite deferral.

**Partial progress is real**: Stapp's model and Eccles' model, whatever their limitations, demonstrate that specification is possible in principle. They map specific phenomenal properties to specific physical parameters through identified mechanisms. The existence of candidate specifications refutes the claim that specification is *impossible*—even if no current candidate is confirmed.

**The alternative is worse**: If consciousness does not influence physical outcomes ([[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]), our beliefs about consciousness are causally disconnected from consciousness itself. The self-stultification problem makes epiphenomenalism epistemically self-defeating. An incomplete specification of a real phenomenon is preferable to a complete account that undermines its own rational basis.

**Difficulty is not evidence of absence**: Many real phenomena resist easy specification. Turbulence in fluid dynamics, protein folding, and the genotype-phenotype map are all real and all resist compact formulation. Specification difficulty is evidence of complexity, not nonexistence.

## What Would Count as Progress?

The specification problem will not be solved all at once. Incremental progress would involve:

**Narrowing the mental variable**: Demonstrating empirically that one type of conscious state (attention, intention, effort, valence) correlates with physical selection while others do not. The willed attention research (Rajan et al.'s theta-band signatures) is a step in this direction.

**Constraining the physical parameter**: Identifying which quantum parameter is affected, even indirectly. If attention influences outcome statistics in ways that differ from purely computational attention models, this constrains the physical side.

**Establishing bandwidth quantitatively**: The ~10 bits/second figure constrains selection capacity. If this constraint is confirmed and sharpened, it narrows the space of possible transfer functions.

**Differential predictions between models**: If Stapp's and Eccles' models can be shown to predict *different* outcomes in some experimental paradigm, even at a statistical level, this would advance specification even without confirming either model.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The interface specification problem is where the Map's tenets face their most demanding test.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** creates the specification problem by positing two ontologically distinct domains that must be lawfully related. If consciousness were identical to brain states, no specification would be needed—everything would be physical causation under different descriptions. The cost of taking dualism seriously is accepting that the mind-matter mapping demands specification that physicalism avoids.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]** simultaneously constrains and enables specification. Consciousness acts only at quantum indeterminacies, which limits where to look—but the subtlety of quantum effects makes detection difficult. The tenet trades empirical accessibility for theoretical elegance.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** means the Map cannot retreat to epiphenomenalism when specification proves difficult. Other dualisms can accept specification failure by denying downward causation. The Map cannot—the tenet demands that consciousness makes a physical difference, which demands that the difference be in principle specifiable.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]** is essential because specification only makes sense if there is genuine selection. Under many-worlds, all outcomes occur—"selection" reduces to indexical self-location, and there is nothing to specify. The specification problem presupposes collapse.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** is the Map's honest acknowledgment that the current state of specification is unsatisfying. The temptation is to adopt a simpler theory (physicalism, epiphenomenalism) that avoids the specification burden. This tenet counsels patience: if consciousness genuinely influences matter, specification difficulty reflects the problem's depth, not the theory's failure.

The specification problem is the Map's most significant open challenge. Acknowledging this is not a weakness—it is intellectual honesty about what an interactionist framework must eventually deliver. The challenge is real, partial answers exist, and the alternative (denying mental causation) is worse. But "worse alternative" is not a solution. The Map's long-term credibility depends on progress here.

## Further Reading

- [[selection-laws]] — What selection laws must specify and candidate formulations
- [[psychophysical-laws]] — Fundamental principles connecting conscious experience to physical processes
- [[coupling-modes]] — Taxonomy of how consciousness couples: basis, timing, or probability control
- [[mental-causation]] — The broader case for consciousness causing physical effects
- [[attention-as-selection-interface]] — The unified attention-motor interface where selection occurs
- [[psychophysical-laws-bridging-mind-and-matter]] — Integrated overview of psychophysical laws
- [[neural-bandwidth-constraints-and-the-interface]] — The ~10 bits/second constraint on conscious selection
- [[pairing-problem]] — What connects a particular mind to a particular body
- [[princess-elizabeths-challenge]] — The original formulation of the interaction problem

## References

- Bell, J.S. (1990). Against 'Measurement'. *Physics World*, 3(8), 33-40.
- Chalmers, D.J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory*. Oxford University Press.
- Eccles, J.C. (1994). *How the Self Controls Its Brain*. Springer.
- Georgiev, D. (2015). Monte Carlo simulation of quantum Zeno effect in the brain. *International Journal of Modern Physics B*, 29(7), 1550039.
- Rajan, A., Siegel, S.N., Liu, Y., Bengson, J., Mangun, G.R., & Ding, M. (2019). Theta oscillations index frontal decision-making and mediate reciprocal frontal-parietal interactions in willed attention. *Cerebral Cortex*, 29(7), 2832-2843.
- Schaffer, J. "Naturalistic Dualism and the Problem of the Physical Correlate." http://www.jonathanschaffer.org/dualismcorrelate.pdf
- Schwartz, J.M., Stapp, H.P., & Beauregard, M. (2005). Quantum physics in neuroscience and psychology. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B*, 360(1458), 1309-1327.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
- Zheng, J. & Meister, M. (2024). The Unbearable Slowness of Being: Why do we live at 10 bits/s? *Neuron*, 112(24).

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): improve topics/epistemology-of-mechanism-at-the-consciousness-matter-interface.md clarity and argumentation
- Added qualifications on introspective reliability (Dennett, Schwitzgebel)
- Added MWI dependency paragraph linking to No Many Worlds tenet
- Rephrased James-Stapp connection as retrospective correspondence
- Added Tegmark decoherence timescales and Nørretranders bandwidth citation
- Added 8 inbound cross-links from concepts and voids articles
- Added 4 new references and 4 new Further Reading entries

obsidian/topics/the-interface-specification-problem.md, after:

---
title: "The Interface Specification Problem"
description: "The hardest open challenge for interactionist dualism: specifying exactly how conscious states map to physical selections. An honest assessment of what the Map can and cannot yet say."
created: 2026-02-16
modified: 2026-02-16
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-02-20T21:06:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[topics/free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[selection-laws]]"
  - "[[psychophysical-laws]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[attention-as-interface]]"
  - "[[causal-closure]]"
  - "[[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[pairing-problem]]"
  - "[[coupling-modes]]"
  - "[[valence]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[attention-as-selection-interface]]"
  - "[[psychophysical-laws-bridging-mind-and-matter]]"
  - "[[neural-bandwidth-constraints-and-the-interface]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-16
last_curated:
last_deep_review: 2026-02-20T21:06:00+00:00
---

If consciousness influences the physical world by biasing quantum outcomes in the brain, exactly which conscious states bias which outcomes, through what mechanism, and by how much? This is the interface specification problem—the most significant open challenge facing The Unfinishable Map's interactionist framework.

The Map can say *that* consciousness acts on matter (the [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet), *where* it acts (at quantum indeterminacies, per [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]), and *through what neural architecture* it acts (the unified [[attention-as-selection-interface|attention-motor interface]]). What remains unspecified is the lawful mapping from phenomenal properties to physical selections—what Chalmers (1996, p. 214) calls the "t-shirt problem": the absence of psychophysical laws compact and precise enough to fit on a t-shirt, as F=ma can. The problem is a descendant of [[princess-elizabeths-challenge|Princess Elisabeth's original challenge]] to Descartes: if mind and body are distinct, how do they interact?

This article examines what the specification problem demands, what partial answers exist, why it remains unsolved, and whether its difficulty is a temporary embarrassment or a permanent feature.

## What Specification Requires

A fully specified interface would answer four questions:

**1. Which mental variables?** Which aspects of conscious experience do the causal work? Candidates include attention (where focus is directed), intention (what action is willed), effort (how much engagement is exerted), and valence (felt goodness or badness). These are not equivalent—specifying the wrong variable would predict the wrong physical effects.

**2. Which physical parameters?** What does consciousness act on? Candidates include quantum measurement rate, probability distributions over outcomes, measurement basis selection, and collapse timing. Each candidate implies different physics and different detectability profiles. The [[coupling-modes]] taxonomy distinguishes basis control (selecting the measurement question), timing control (selecting when collapse occurs), and probability control (reweighting outcome likelihoods).

**3. What is the transfer function?** How does a given mental state map quantitatively to a physical effect? More attention should produce more effect—but how much more? Linearly? With diminishing returns? With a threshold below which nothing happens? Without a transfer function, "consciousness biases outcomes" is a qualitative sketch, not a testable theory.

**4. What are the boundary conditions?** Under what circumstances does selection operate, and under what circumstances does it fail? The ~10 bits/second [[neural-bandwidth-constraints-and-the-interface|bandwidth constraint]] on conscious processing suggests one boundary. Interface locality—the restriction of mental causation to the subject's own brain (a constraint related to the [[pairing-problem]])—suggests another. A complete specification would derive these constraints rather than stipulating them.

## Partial Answers

The Map's framework is not empty. Two candidate specifications have been developed to the point of generating predictions.

### Stapp's Attention-Observation Coupling

Henry Stapp's quantum Zeno model provides the most detailed specification available. The mapping: sustained voluntary attention increases the rate of quantum observations on neural systems, which through the Zeno effect holds desired patterns stable against their natural tendency to dissipate.

**Mental variable**: Attention intensity.
**Physical parameter**: Observation frequency on neural quantum states.
**Transfer function**: Higher attention → higher observation rate → longer pattern persistence. The relationship is monotonic, though the precise functional form is unspecified.
**Boundary conditions**: Only neural systems already within the subject's attentional scope. Only genuinely quantum-indeterminate events.

Stapp's proposal meets the basic adequacy standard—it specifies *which* phenomenal property affects *which* physical parameter through *what* mechanism. Schwartz's OCD research provides indirect support: patients who direct sustained attention to reframe intrusive thoughts show measurable changes in caudate metabolism. The 2019 Rajan et al. findings on theta-band oscillations during willed attention provide a neural signature distinguishing willed from instructed processing, consistent with (though not proving) a distinct causal mechanism.

The limitations are real. Georgiev's Monte Carlo simulations challenge whether the Zeno effect operates on the timescales required. Stapp responds that these simulations oversimplify the quantum system, but consensus has not emerged.

### Eccles' Intention-Probability Coupling

John Eccles proposed that conscious intention modulates quantum tunneling probability in neurotransmitter vesicle release. The brain prepares multiple action possibilities; intention biases which patterns dominate by influencing whether vesicles release at specific synapses.

**Mental variable**: Intention (what action is willed).
**Physical parameter**: Quantum tunneling probability at synaptic vesicle release sites.
**Transfer function**: Stronger intention → higher release probability at synapses supporting the intended action.
**Boundary conditions**: Only vesicle release events at synapses in the relevant motor/attentional circuits.

This proposal is less developed than Stapp's and faces the [[pairing-problem]]—how does an intention "know" which synapses to bias? Stapp's model avoids this by working through attention, which already has a neural mechanism for targeting specific systems.

### Three Unspecified Candidates

Three other candidates remain at the qualitative stage:

- **[[valence|Valence]] → action selection**: Felt pleasure and pain bias approach/avoidance. Evidence from pain asymbolia (patients who register pain cognitively but lack the felt badness, and fail to avoid harm) supports the causal role of phenomenal valence. But no quantum mechanism has been proposed.
- **Qualia → basis selection**: Qualitative character might determine which quantum measurement basis applies. Purely speculative.
- **Phenomenal unity → sustained entanglement**: The binding of experience into a unified field might correspond to sustained quantum coherence. But correlation does not establish the causal direction.

## Why Specification Is Hard

The specification problem is not merely unsolved—it may be structurally difficult in ways that distinguish it from ordinary scientific puzzles.

### The Concept Gap

We may lack the right concepts. Physical laws relate physical quantities to each other—force to mass, energy to frequency. [[Selection-laws]] would relate phenomenal quantities to physical quantities. But phenomenal quantities resist the kind of measurement and mathematical formalisation that physical quantities permit. How much attention is "twice as much"? Is there a natural unit of effort?

Psychophysics has scaling methods (Stevens' power law relates stimulus intensity to perceived intensity), but these relate physical inputs to behavioural outputs—the phenomenal middleman is inferred, not measured. A genuine selection law would need to quantify phenomenal states *as* phenomenal states, not merely as their physical correlates. We currently have no way to do this.

### The Access Problem

Even if selection laws exist, we may not be able to discover them through normal empirical methods. The laws relate conscious experience to quantum events. We access experience through first-person report and quantum events through third-person measurement, but we have no instrument that simultaneously tracks both with the precision needed. The ~10 bits/second bandwidth of conscious processing means that introspective reports are coarse-grained; quantum measurement is destructive and alters what it measures.

This is not a complaint about current technology. It may reflect a deeper structural constraint: the interface operates at a scale and speed where first-person and third-person methods cannot simultaneously apply with adequate precision.

### The Underdetermination Problem

Multiple specification schemes may be empirically equivalent. If consciousness biases quantum outcomes at rates below current experimental detection (as the Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet suggests), we cannot distinguish between:
- Attention modulating observation rate (Stapp)
- Intention modulating tunneling probability (Eccles)
- Some combination of phenomenal properties influencing multiple parameters

The proposals make different metaphysical claims but predict indistinguishable physical outcomes at accessible experimental scales. This is not unfalsifiability—all proposals predict that *something* beyond standard physics contributes to neural outcome determination—but it is underdetermination of the specific mechanism.

## Analogies and Disanalogies

### The Historical Analogy

Defenders of the interactionist program often cite historical precedents. Newton's gravitational theory specified *that* masses attract and *how much* (the inverse-square law) without explaining *the mechanism*. The theory was spectacularly successful for two centuries before general relativity provided the mechanism (spacetime curvature). Might selection laws be in their Newtonian phase—quantitatively useful before being mechanistically understood?

The analogy has limits. Newton had precise measurements and a mathematical law. The interface specification problem lacks both. We are not in a Newtonian phase where the law is known but the mechanism is not. We are in a pre-Newtonian phase where neither the law nor the mechanism is established. The honest comparison is to Aristotelian physics before Kepler—we know *something* is happening but cannot yet characterise it precisely.

### The Complexity Analogy

Biological systems often resist compact specification. The mapping from genotype to phenotype cannot be captured in a simple formula—it involves gene regulatory networks, epigenetic modifications, environmental interactions, and developmental contingency. Perhaps the mind-matter interface is similarly complex: not a single law but a web of context-dependent relationships.

This is more promising but raises its own problem. Complex biological relationships are still *physical* relationships, amenable to empirical investigation. If the mind-matter interface involves fundamentally non-physical variables, the usual tools for untangling complexity may not apply.

## The Critic's Strongest Objection

The specification problem is not just an internal challenge for dualism—it provides the strongest objection from critics. The argument:

1. If consciousness influences physical outcomes, there must be specifiable laws governing that influence
2. No such laws have been specified despite decades of philosophical and scientific effort
3. The difficulty of specification is best explained by the hypothesis that there is nothing to specify—consciousness does not influence physical outcomes

This is a serious argument. The Map's responses:

**Scientific youth**: Consciousness science is genuinely young. Serious empirical investigation of consciousness dates to the 1990s. Expecting a mature specification in three decades is unreasonable given that physics took centuries to reach its current precision. This response is honest but risks becoming an indefinite deferral.

**Partial progress is real**: Stapp's model and Eccles' model, whatever their limitations, demonstrate that specification is possible in principle. They map specific phenomenal properties to specific physical parameters through identified mechanisms. The existence of candidate specifications refutes the claim that specification is *impossible*—even if no current candidate is confirmed.

**The alternative is worse**: If consciousness does not influence physical outcomes ([[concepts/epiphenomenalism]]), our beliefs about consciousness are causally disconnected from consciousness itself. The self-stultification problem makes epiphenomenalism epistemically self-defeating. An incomplete specification of a real phenomenon is preferable to a complete account that undermines its own rational basis.

**Difficulty is not evidence of absence**: Many real phenomena resist easy specification. Turbulence in fluid dynamics, protein folding, and the genotype-phenotype map are all real and all resist compact formulation. Specification difficulty is evidence of complexity, not nonexistence.

## What Would Count as Progress?

The specification problem will not be solved all at once. Incremental progress would involve:

**Narrowing the mental variable**: Demonstrating empirically that one type of conscious state (attention, intention, effort, valence) correlates with physical selection while others do not. The willed attention research (Rajan et al.'s theta-band signatures) is a step in this direction.

**Constraining the physical parameter**: Identifying which quantum parameter is affected, even indirectly. If attention influences outcome statistics in ways that differ from purely computational attention models, this constrains the physical side.

**Establishing bandwidth quantitatively**: The ~10 bits/second figure constrains selection capacity. If this constraint is confirmed and sharpened, it narrows the space of possible transfer functions.

**Differential predictions between models**: If Stapp's and Eccles' models can be shown to predict *different* outcomes in some experimental paradigm, even at a statistical level, this would advance specification even without confirming either model.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The interface specification problem is where the Map's tenets face their most demanding test.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** creates the specification problem by positing two ontologically distinct domains that must be lawfully related. If consciousness were identical to brain states, no specification would be needed—everything would be physical causation under different descriptions. The cost of taking dualism seriously is accepting that the mind-matter mapping demands specification that physicalism avoids.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]** simultaneously constrains and enables specification. Consciousness acts only at quantum indeterminacies, which limits where to look—but the subtlety of quantum effects makes detection difficult. The tenet trades empirical accessibility for theoretical elegance.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** means the Map cannot retreat to epiphenomenalism when specification proves difficult. Other dualisms can accept specification failure by denying downward causation. The Map cannot—the tenet demands that consciousness makes a physical difference, which demands that the difference be in principle specifiable.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]** is essential because specification only makes sense if there is genuine selection. Under many-worlds, all outcomes occur—"selection" reduces to indexical self-location, and there is nothing to specify. The specification problem presupposes collapse.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** is the Map's honest acknowledgment that the current state of specification is unsatisfying. The temptation is to adopt a simpler theory (physicalism, epiphenomenalism) that avoids the specification burden. This tenet counsels patience: if consciousness genuinely influences matter, specification difficulty reflects the problem's depth, not the theory's failure.

The specification problem is the Map's most significant open challenge. Acknowledging this is not a weakness—it is intellectual honesty about what an interactionist framework must eventually deliver. The challenge is real, partial answers exist, and the alternative (denying mental causation) is worse. But "worse alternative" is not a solution. The Map's long-term credibility depends on progress here.

## Further Reading

- [[selection-laws]] — What selection laws must specify and candidate formulations
- [[psychophysical-laws]] — Fundamental principles connecting conscious experience to physical processes
- [[coupling-modes]] — Taxonomy of how consciousness couples: basis, timing, or probability control
- [[mental-causation]] — The broader case for consciousness causing physical effects
- [[attention-as-selection-interface]] — The unified attention-motor interface where selection occurs
- [[psychophysical-laws-bridging-mind-and-matter]] — Integrated overview of psychophysical laws
- [[neural-bandwidth-constraints-and-the-interface]] — The ~10 bits/second constraint on conscious selection
- [[pairing-problem]] — What connects a particular mind to a particular body
- [[princess-elizabeths-challenge]] — The original formulation of the interaction problem
- [[epistemology-of-mechanism-at-the-consciousness-matter-interface]] — What epistemic methods can reach the interface when direct observation is impossible

## References

- Bell, J.S. (1990). Against 'Measurement'. *Physics World*, 3(8), 33-40.
- Chalmers, D.J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory*. Oxford University Press.
- Eccles, J.C. (1994). *How the Self Controls Its Brain*. Springer.
- Georgiev, D. (2015). Monte Carlo simulation of quantum Zeno effect in the brain. *International Journal of Modern Physics B*, 29(7), 1550039.
- Rajan, A., Siegel, S.N., Liu, Y., Bengson, J., Mangun, G.R., & Ding, M. (2019). Theta oscillations index frontal decision-making and mediate reciprocal frontal-parietal interactions in willed attention. *Cerebral Cortex*, 29(7), 2832-2843.
- Schaffer, J. "Naturalistic Dualism and the Problem of the Physical Correlate." http://www.jonathanschaffer.org/dualismcorrelate.pdf
- Schwartz, J.M., Stapp, H.P., & Beauregard, M. (2005). Quantum physics in neuroscience and psychology. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B*, 360(1458), 1309-1327.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
- Zheng, J. & Meister, M. (2024). The Unbearable Slowness of Being: Why do we live at 10 bits/s? *Neuron*, 112(24).
