obsidian/tenets/tenets.md, before:

---
title: Tenets
created: 2026-01-02
modified: 2026-01-02
human_modified: 2026-01-02T14:18:31+00:00
ai_modified: 2026-01-14T00:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
related_articles: []
ai_contribution: 0
author: Andy Southgate
ai_system:
ai_generated_date:
last_curated:
---
These are the foundational commitments that constrain all content on this site. They are not proven—they are chosen starting points that shape the exploration.

## Dualism

There is more than just matter involved in reality. ^dualism

**Definition:** Dualism here means that consciousness (or mind, or experience) is not reducible to physical processes. There exists something beyond the material—whether substance, property, or aspect—that cannot be fully explained by physics alone.

**Rationale:** The explanatory gap between physical descriptions and subjective experience remains unbridged. No amount of neurological detail tells us *why* there is something it is like to be conscious.

**Rules out:** Eliminative materialism, reductive physicalism, and any view that treats consciousness as purely [[epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]] or illusory.

## Minimal Quantum Interaction

The smallest possible non-physical influence on physical outcomes. ^minimal-quantum-interaction

**Definition:** If consciousness can influence the physical world, it must do so at the quantum level—biasing otherwise indeterminate outcomes without injecting energy or violating conservation laws. This tenet commits to the *minimal* such interaction: the smallest deviation from standard quantum mechanics that could permit mind-matter causation.

**Rationale:** If dualism is true, there must be some interface where mind and matter meet. Quantum indeterminacy provides a candidate location—decisions might be made where physics leaves outcomes undetermined. The principle of minimality says: assume the smallest intervention necessary, not more. Crucially, this tenet rejects the strong causal closure of physics that [[epiphenomenalism]] depends on: the claim that every physical event has a sufficient physical cause. Physics is *not* complete at quantum indeterminacies—and that's where consciousness acts.

**Candidate mechanisms:** Serious scientific proposals have explored this interface. [[quantum-consciousness|Orch OR]] (Penrose-Hameroff) locates quantum effects in neural microtubules, with consciousness selecting among superposed states via gravitational self-collapse. Stapp's [[quantum-consciousness#Quantum Zeno Effect (Stapp)|quantum Zeno approach]] uses orthodox quantum mechanics—mental attention acts like repeated observation, holding desired neural patterns through the Zeno effect. Both share what this tenet requires: consciousness biasing indeterminate outcomes without injecting energy or violating conservation laws. The site doesn't commit to either mechanism but holds that *some* such interface exists.

**Not to be confused with:** "Quantum woo" or "quantum mysticism"—pseudoscientific claims that misappropriate quantum mechanics terminology to justify New Age beliefs, parapsychology, or magical thinking. This tenet is a constrained philosophical hypothesis about the mind-body problem, not an endorsement of quantum mysticism.

**Rules out:** Uncontrolled psychokinesis, energy injection by mind, and any interaction that would be empirically detectable under current experimental precision.

## Bidirectional Interaction

Consciousness is not a passive observer—it causally influences the physical world. ^bidirectional-interaction

**Definition:** If we can speak, write, or otherwise report our conscious experiences, then information about consciousness must flow into the physical domain. This requires a mechanism by which the non-physical influences physical outcomes. The proposed mechanism: consciousness selects among superposed neural states, collapsing quantum indeterminacy in the brain toward patterns that express its content.

**Rationale:** The very fact that we discuss consciousness provides strong evidence against epiphenomenalism. An epiphenomenon—causally inert by definition—could not influence the neurons that move our mouths or type our words. Yet here we are, talking about qualia. The conversation itself suggests downward causation.

**The [[epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenalist]] response:** A critic might argue that our discussions of consciousness are themselves just physical processes—neurons causing neurons, with no mental causation involved. We *believe* we're reporting on qualia, but this belief is itself just more neurons firing.

**The problem with that response:** If consciousness were truly epiphenomenal, then our beliefs *about* consciousness would be causally disconnected from our actual conscious states. Our reports about the redness of red or the painfulness of pain would be produced by brain states that have no causal connection to the experiences themselves. This makes introspective reports systematically unreliable—not occasionally wrong, but *accidentally right at best*. Yet the epiphenomenalist presumably trusts their own introspection enough to engage in this very debate. The position is self-undermining: it cannot be rationally held by someone who arrived at it through introspection and reasoning about their own experience.

**Analogy:** Just as radioactive decay "chooses" whether Schrödinger's cat lives or dies by collapsing a superposition, consciousness may "choose" which of many superposed neural firing patterns becomes actual. The brain presents options; the mind selects.

**Rules out:** Pure [[epiphenomenalism]], parallelism without interaction, and any view where consciousness is merely along for the ride.

## No Many Worlds

The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics is rejected. ^no-many-worlds

**Definition:** Many-worlds holds that every quantum measurement causes the universe to split into branches for each possible outcome. All branches are equally real.

**Rationale:** Many-worlds leads to vast ontological proliferation—countless copies of every observer existing in parallel. More problematically, it raises unanswerable indexical questions: why am I *this* instance and not another? The framework provides no resources to answer this, yet the question seems meaningful.

**Rules out:** Interpretations that treat all quantum branches as equally real, and approaches that dismiss indexical identity as meaningless.

## Occam's Razor Has Limits

Simplicity is not a reliable guide to truth when knowledge is incomplete. ^occams-limits

**Definition:** Occam's Razor—the principle that simpler explanations should be preferred—is a useful heuristic but not a law of nature. It fails when we lack the concepts or data to recognize what is actually simple, and it has repeatedly pointed away from truth in the history of science.

**Historical counterexamples:**
- *Heliocentrism* initially required more epicycles than geocentrism to match observations. The "simpler" Earth-centered model was wrong.
- *Atomic theory* posited invisible entities when continuous matter seemed simpler. Atoms were real.
- *Quantum mechanics* replaced deterministic simplicity with probability amplitudes, superposition, and entanglement.
- *General relativity* curved spacetime itself rather than keeping flat space with forces—vastly more complex, yet correct.

**Rationale:** When confronting the hard problem of consciousness, we face a domain where our conceptual tools may be fundamentally inadequate. Dismissing dualism because materialism seems "simpler" assumes we understand enough to judge simplicity. We may not. The apparent simplicity of physicalism could reflect ignorance rather than insight.

**Rules out:** Using parsimony as a decisive argument against dualism, and treating Occam's Razor as anything more than a defeasible heuristic.

Commit message:

feat(auto): cross-review - tenets with interactionist-dualism article
Task: Cross-review tenets.md considering interactionist-dualism insights
Session: 23

obsidian/tenets/tenets.md, after:

---
title: Tenets
created: 2026-01-02
modified: 2026-01-02
human_modified: 2026-01-02T14:18:31+00:00
ai_modified: 2026-01-13T11:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
related_articles: []
ai_contribution: 0
author: Andy Southgate
ai_system:
ai_generated_date:
last_curated:
---
These are the foundational commitments that constrain all content on this site. They are not proven—they are chosen starting points that shape the exploration.

## Dualism

There is more than just matter involved in reality. ^dualism

**Definition:** Dualism here means that consciousness (or mind, or experience) is not reducible to physical processes. There exists something beyond the material—whether substance, property, or aspect—that cannot be fully explained by physics alone. Combined with the Bidirectional Interaction tenet below, this commits the site to [[interactionist-dualism]]—the position that mind and body are distinct yet causally connected.

**Rationale:** The explanatory gap between physical descriptions and subjective experience remains unbridged. No amount of neurological detail tells us *why* there is something it is like to be conscious.

**Rules out:** Eliminative materialism, reductive physicalism, and any view that treats consciousness as purely [[epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenal]] or illusory.

## Minimal Quantum Interaction

The smallest possible non-physical influence on physical outcomes. ^minimal-quantum-interaction

**Definition:** If consciousness can influence the physical world, it must do so at the quantum level—biasing otherwise indeterminate outcomes without injecting energy or violating conservation laws. This tenet commits to the *minimal* such interaction: the smallest deviation from standard quantum mechanics that could permit mind-matter causation.

**Rationale:** If dualism is true, there must be some interface where mind and matter meet. Quantum indeterminacy provides a candidate location—decisions might be made where physics leaves outcomes undetermined. The principle of minimality says: assume the smallest intervention necessary, not more. Crucially, this tenet rejects the strong causal closure of physics that [[epiphenomenalism]] depends on: the claim that every physical event has a sufficient physical cause. Physics is *not* complete at quantum indeterminacies—and that's where consciousness acts.

**Candidate mechanisms:** Serious scientific proposals have explored this interface. [[quantum-consciousness|Orch OR]] (Penrose-Hameroff) locates quantum effects in neural microtubules, with consciousness selecting among superposed states via gravitational self-collapse. Stapp's [[quantum-consciousness#Quantum Zeno Effect (Stapp)|quantum Zeno approach]] uses orthodox quantum mechanics—mental attention acts like repeated observation, holding desired neural patterns through the Zeno effect. Both share what this tenet requires: consciousness biasing indeterminate outcomes without injecting energy or violating conservation laws. The site doesn't commit to either mechanism but holds that *some* such interface exists.

**Not to be confused with:** "Quantum woo" or "quantum mysticism"—pseudoscientific claims that misappropriate quantum mechanics terminology to justify New Age beliefs, parapsychology, or magical thinking. This tenet is a constrained philosophical hypothesis about the mind-body problem, not an endorsement of quantum mysticism.

**Rules out:** Uncontrolled psychokinesis, energy injection by mind, and any interaction that would be empirically detectable under current experimental precision.

## Bidirectional Interaction

Consciousness is not a passive observer—it causally influences the physical world. ^bidirectional-interaction

**Definition:** If we can speak, write, or otherwise report our conscious experiences, then information about consciousness must flow into the physical domain. This requires a mechanism by which the non-physical influences physical outcomes. The proposed mechanism: consciousness selects among superposed neural states, collapsing quantum indeterminacy in the brain toward patterns that express its content. For detailed treatment of [[interactionist-dualism#The Causal Closure Argument|the causal closure objection]] and how quantum mechanics provides a response, see the [[interactionist-dualism]] article.

**Rationale:** The very fact that we discuss consciousness provides strong evidence against epiphenomenalism. An epiphenomenon—causally inert by definition—could not influence the neurons that move our mouths or type our words. Yet here we are, talking about qualia. The conversation itself suggests downward causation.

**The [[epiphenomenalism|epiphenomenalist]] response:** A critic might argue that our discussions of consciousness are themselves just physical processes—neurons causing neurons, with no mental causation involved. We *believe* we're reporting on qualia, but this belief is itself just more neurons firing.

**The problem with that response:** If consciousness were truly epiphenomenal, then our beliefs *about* consciousness would be causally disconnected from our actual conscious states. Our reports about the redness of red or the painfulness of pain would be produced by brain states that have no causal connection to the experiences themselves. This makes introspective reports systematically unreliable—not occasionally wrong, but *accidentally right at best*. Yet the epiphenomenalist presumably trusts their own introspection enough to engage in this very debate. The position is self-undermining: it cannot be rationally held by someone who arrived at it through introspection and reasoning about their own experience.

**Analogy:** Just as radioactive decay "chooses" whether Schrödinger's cat lives or dies by collapsing a superposition, consciousness may "choose" which of many superposed neural firing patterns becomes actual. The brain presents options; the mind selects.

**Rules out:** Pure [[epiphenomenalism]], parallelism without interaction, and any view where consciousness is merely along for the ride.

## No Many Worlds

The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics is rejected. ^no-many-worlds

**Definition:** Many-worlds holds that every quantum measurement causes the universe to split into branches for each possible outcome. All branches are equally real.

**Rationale:** Many-worlds leads to vast ontological proliferation—countless copies of every observer existing in parallel. More problematically, it raises unanswerable indexical questions: why am I *this* instance and not another? The framework provides no resources to answer this, yet the question seems meaningful.

**Rules out:** Interpretations that treat all quantum branches as equally real, and approaches that dismiss indexical identity as meaningless.

## Occam's Razor Has Limits

Simplicity is not a reliable guide to truth when knowledge is incomplete. ^occams-limits

**Definition:** Occam's Razor—the principle that simpler explanations should be preferred—is a useful heuristic but not a law of nature. It fails when we lack the concepts or data to recognize what is actually simple, and it has repeatedly pointed away from truth in the history of science.

**Historical counterexamples:**
- *Heliocentrism* initially required more epicycles than geocentrism to match observations. The "simpler" Earth-centered model was wrong.
- *Atomic theory* posited invisible entities when continuous matter seemed simpler. Atoms were real.
- *Quantum mechanics* replaced deterministic simplicity with probability amplitudes, superposition, and entanglement.
- *General relativity* curved spacetime itself rather than keeping flat space with forces—vastly more complex, yet correct.

**Rationale:** When confronting the hard problem of consciousness, we face a domain where our conceptual tools may be fundamentally inadequate. Dismissing dualism because materialism seems "simpler" assumes we understand enough to judge simplicity. We may not. The apparent simplicity of physicalism could reflect ignorance rather than insight.

**Rules out:** Using parsimony as a decisive argument against dualism, and treating Occam's Razor as anything more than a defeasible heuristic.
