obsidian/arguments/epiphenomenalism.md, before:

---
title: "Against Epiphenomenalism"
created: 2026-01-15
modified: 2026-01-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-15T22:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[causal-closure]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Epiphenomenalism holds that consciousness is causally inert—a byproduct of brain activity that affects nothing. The site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet directly contradicts this view. This page presents the cumulative case against epiphenomenalism.

## The View Under Attack

Epiphenomenalism accepts that consciousness exists and is genuinely mental. It accepts that brain states cause conscious states. What it denies is that conscious states cause anything in return. Consciousness is steam rising from a locomotive—produced by the engine but playing no role in moving the train.

The appeal is understandable. If physics is causally closed, and if consciousness is not identical to physical processes, then where could mental causation fit? Epiphenomenalism avoids the interaction problem by denying interaction. But this solution creates worse problems than it solves.

## Argument 1: Self-Stultification

**Premise 1**: We discuss consciousness—we write about qualia, debate the hard problem, report our experiences.

**Premise 2**: If epiphenomenalism is true, these discussions are not caused by consciousness itself.

**Premise 3**: If our discussions are not caused by consciousness, our reports about consciousness are accidentally correlated with their subject matter at best.

**Premise 4**: Beliefs formed without causal connection to their subject matter are not rationally held.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism cannot be rationally believed on the basis of evidence about consciousness.

This is the decisive argument. Consider what happens when you read an argument for epiphenomenalism:

You find it convincing. You form the belief that consciousness is causally inert. You think: "Yes, this makes sense—consciousness must be epiphenomenal."

But if epiphenomenalism is true, your belief was not caused by the argument's cogency. It was caused entirely by brain states that have nothing to do with the reasoning. Your conscious understanding—the sense of "aha, this makes sense!"—played no role in forming the belief. The neurons would have fired the same way whether or not you consciously understood anything.

Worse: your introspective reports are not caused by your experiences. When you say "I'm in pain," the pain doesn't cause the utterance. Brain states do. Your report is *about* the pain, but the pain has no causal connection to the report.

The problem generalizes:
- Your reasoning about consciousness doesn't cause your beliefs about consciousness
- Your experiences don't cause your reports about your experiences
- Any evidence for epiphenomenalism reaches your beliefs through causally inert consciousness—which means it doesn't reach them at all

This makes epiphenomenalism epistemically self-undermining. Not logically contradictory—it could still be true—but impossible to hold *rationally*. Anyone who claims to believe epiphenomenalism on the basis of evidence must be wrong about something.

## Argument 2: The Evolutionary Objection

**Premise 1**: Consciousness exists as a natural phenomenon in biological organisms.

**Premise 2**: Natural selection operates on traits that affect survival and reproduction.

**Premise 3**: If consciousness is epiphenomenal, it has no effects on behavior and thus no effects on survival or reproduction.

**Premise 4**: Traits without fitness effects cannot be selected for.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism cannot explain why consciousness evolved.

William James raised this objection over a century ago. If consciousness does nothing, why do we have it?

The epiphenomenalist response: the *brain states* that produce consciousness were selected; consciousness itself is just a byproduct. The neural structures that make us flee predators were advantageous; that these structures also produce fear experience is incidental.

This response has two problems:

**The correlation problem**: Why does consciousness *track* adaptive features? It would be quite a coincidence if causally inert consciousness just happened to accompany exactly those brain states that produce adaptive behavior. Without causal connection, why should pain accompany tissue damage rather than, say, pleasant surprises? Why should fear accompany threats rather than meals?

The epiphenomenalist must posit systematic correlation without causal explanation—a brute correlation between phenomenal states and functional states that extends across the entire animal kingdom. This is not impossible, but it is unexplained.

**The complexity problem**: Consciousness appears to have elaborate structure—not just present or absent but richly varied in content, intensity, and character. Why would evolution produce this elaborate epiphenomenal architecture? The neural machinery that generates conscious experience is metabolically expensive. If consciousness does nothing, this is pure waste—as if evolution built elaborate decorative features that confer no advantage.

Interactionism explains both. Consciousness tracks adaptive features because consciousness *causes* adaptive responses. Fear accompanies threats because fear causes avoidance. The elaborate structure exists because it serves a function.

## Argument 3: The Knowledge Argument Reversed

**Premise 1**: Mary, the colour scientist, learns something new upon seeing red for the first time—what red looks like.

**Premise 2**: If this new knowledge is causally inert, it cannot affect her subsequent behavior.

**Premise 3**: Yet Mary behaves differently after seeing red—she can recognize, describe, imagine, and respond to red experiences.

**Premise 4**: Her changed behavior must be caused by something.

**Conclusion**: Either the new phenomenal knowledge causes her behavior, or epiphenomenalism requires an unexplained coincidence.

The [[knowledge-argument]] is usually directed against physicalism. But it also challenges epiphenomenalism.

Mary, in her black-and-white room, knows everything physical about colour vision. She leaves the room and sees a red tomato. She learns something new—what red looks like.

Now consider her subsequent behavior. She says "So *this* is what red looks like!" She can now identify red objects by sight. She can imagine red when asked. Her behavior has changed.

The epiphenomenalist must say: the phenomenal knowledge (what red looks like) is not what causes her new abilities. Some neural state causes both the phenomenal knowledge and the behavioral changes. The correlation is not causal.

But this is strange. The most natural explanation of Mary's new abilities is that they're caused by her new knowledge. She can recognize red because she *knows what it looks like*. Epiphenomenalism forces us to deny this natural explanation and posit pre-established harmony between phenomenal states and behavioral capacities.

## Argument 4: Introspection Becomes Inexplicable

**Premise 1**: We have introspective access to our conscious states—we can attend to, report on, and reason about our experiences.

**Premise 2**: Introspection is a causal process—attention is directed, information is accessed, reports are generated.

**Premise 3**: If consciousness causes nothing, it cannot causally contribute to the introspective process.

**Premise 4**: But introspection is supposed to be *about* consciousness.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism makes introspection inexplicable—a process about a subject that has no causal role in the process.

We normally understand introspection as consciousness examining itself. You turn your attention inward, notice you're in pain, and report "I'm in pain." The pain seems to be both the object and the cause of the report.

Epiphenomenalism severs this connection. The pain is the object but not the cause. Your report is about the pain, but the pain doesn't cause the report. Neural states cause the report; the pain is just along for the ride.

This makes introspection unlike any other form of knowledge. When you see a red apple, the apple causally contributes to your visual experience. When you remember your birthday, the memory trace causally contributes to your recollection. But when you introspect your pain, the pain contributes nothing—the process is entirely neural, and the phenomenal object is causally disconnected.

If consciousness cannot influence even our *attention to* consciousness, how can introspective reports be reliable? The report and its object float free of each other.

## Argument 5: The Self-Knowledge Problem

**Premise 1**: We know that we are conscious.

**Premise 2**: Knowledge typically requires appropriate causal connection between the knower and the known.

**Premise 3**: If consciousness is epiphenomenal, there is no causal connection between our consciousness and our beliefs about consciousness.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism undermines self-knowledge of consciousness.

You know you're in pain. How do you know? The obvious answer: the pain itself informs you. The pain causes the belief that you're in pain.

Epiphenomenalism says: No. The pain causes nothing. Your belief is caused by the neural state that also causes the pain. The pain and the belief are co-effects of a common cause; the pain doesn't cause the belief.

But this is strange as an account of self-knowledge. We normally think we know our own minds *because* our mental states cause our beliefs about them. I know I'm imagining a red apple because the imagining causes the belief that I'm imagining. Epiphenomenalism severs this connection and leaves self-knowledge unexplained.

This connects to the self-stultification argument. If consciousness can't cause beliefs, beliefs about consciousness become mysterious—correct by coincidence rather than by design.

## The Cumulative Case

| Argument | What It Shows |
|----------|---------------|
| Self-Stultification | Epiphenomenalism cannot be rationally believed on the basis of introspective evidence |
| Evolutionary Objection | Epiphenomenalism cannot explain why consciousness exists |
| Knowledge Argument Reversed | Epiphenomenalism requires unexplained correlation between phenomenal states and behavioral changes |
| Introspection Problem | Epiphenomenalism makes introspection inexplicable |
| Self-Knowledge Problem | Epiphenomenalism undermines knowledge of our own minds |

Arguments 1 and 5 are epistemological—they show that accepting epiphenomenalism undermines the very grounds for believing it. Arguments 2 and 3 show that epiphenomenalism requires implausible coincidences. Argument 4 shows that epiphenomenalism cannot account for our most basic cognitive access to consciousness.

Together, they show that epiphenomenalism is not merely wrong but *self-undermining*.

## The Motivation for Epiphenomenalism

Why would anyone accept such a problematic view? The answer is [[causal-closure]]: the principle that every physical event has a sufficient physical cause.

If causal closure is true, and if consciousness is not physical, then consciousness cannot cause physical events—physical causes pre-empt mental causes. Epiphenomenalism follows as the least bad option: deny mental causation rather than deny that consciousness exists or reduce it to physics.

The site's response: deny causal closure at quantum indeterminacies. The [[measurement-problem]] shows that quantum mechanics does not specify which outcome occurs—it provides probabilities, not determinations. At these points, physics is genuinely incomplete. Consciousness can cause physical events precisely where physics leaves room.

This is the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet: consciousness biases quantum outcomes without violating conservation laws. No energy is injected; outcomes physics already permits are selected. This preserves what's true in causal closure (physics explains physical events where physics determines them) while denying what's false (physics determines everything).

## Relation to This Site's Perspective

The arguments against epiphenomenalism directly support the site's framework:

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: The self-stultification argument shows consciousness must cause behavior. Our reports about consciousness must be caused by consciousness, or they cannot be trusted. The tenet that consciousness "selects among superposed neural states" follows.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: The site accepts that consciousness is irreducible to physics—a point epiphenomenalism also accepts. But dualism alone doesn't require causation. The arguments here show that dualism must be *interactionist* dualism.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: The quantum framework provides *how* mental causation occurs without the problems epiphenomenalism tries to avoid. Consciousness doesn't violate causal closure by injecting energy; it operates where causal closure doesn't apply.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Epiphenomenalism might seem simpler—no mysterious downward causation. But a theory that explains nothing is not parsimonious. Epiphenomenalism explains correlations between consciousness and behavior only by brute coincidence. Interactionism explains them by causation.

## Further Reading

- [[epiphenomenalism]] — The view examined in detail
- [[mental-causation]] — Kim's exclusion argument and responses
- [[causal-closure]] — The principle motivating epiphenomenalism
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The positive case for interaction
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — How mental causation could work
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room and what it shows
- [[tenets]] — The site's foundational commitments

## References

- Chalmers, D. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Huxley, T.H. (1874). "On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata, and its History."
- Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Henry Holt.
- Kim, J. (1998). *Mind in a Physical World*. MIT Press.
- Robinson, W.S. (2019). Epiphenomenalism. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

obsidian/arguments/epiphenomenalism.md, after:

---
title: "Against Epiphenomenalism"
created: 2026-01-15
modified: 2026-01-15
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-15T22:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
concepts:
  - "[[epiphenomenalism]]"
  - "[[mental-causation]]"
  - "[[causal-closure]]"
  - "[[interactionist-dualism]]"
  - "[[knowledge-argument]]"
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[materialism]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
---

Epiphenomenalism holds that consciousness is causally inert—a byproduct of brain activity that affects nothing. the project's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet directly contradicts this view. This page presents the cumulative case against epiphenomenalism.

## The View Under Attack

Epiphenomenalism accepts that consciousness exists and is genuinely mental. It accepts that brain states cause conscious states. What it denies is that conscious states cause anything in return. Consciousness is steam rising from a locomotive—produced by the engine but playing no role in moving the train.

The appeal is understandable. If physics is causally closed, and if consciousness is not identical to physical processes, then where could mental causation fit? Epiphenomenalism avoids the interaction problem by denying interaction. But this solution creates worse problems than it solves.

## Argument 1: Self-Stultification

**Premise 1**: We discuss consciousness—we write about qualia, debate the hard problem, report our experiences.

**Premise 2**: If epiphenomenalism is true, these discussions are not caused by consciousness itself.

**Premise 3**: If our discussions are not caused by consciousness, our reports about consciousness are accidentally correlated with their subject matter at best.

**Premise 4**: Beliefs formed without causal connection to their subject matter are not rationally held.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism cannot be rationally believed on the basis of evidence about consciousness.

This is the decisive argument. Consider what happens when you read an argument for epiphenomenalism:

You find it convincing. You form the belief that consciousness is causally inert. You think: "Yes, this makes sense—consciousness must be epiphenomenal."

But if epiphenomenalism is true, your belief was not caused by the argument's cogency. It was caused entirely by brain states that have nothing to do with the reasoning. Your conscious understanding—the sense of "aha, this makes sense!"—played no role in forming the belief. The neurons would have fired the same way whether or not you consciously understood anything.

Worse: your introspective reports are not caused by your experiences. When you say "I'm in pain," the pain doesn't cause the utterance. Brain states do. Your report is *about* the pain, but the pain has no causal connection to the report.

The problem generalizes:
- Your reasoning about consciousness doesn't cause your beliefs about consciousness
- Your experiences don't cause your reports about your experiences
- Any evidence for epiphenomenalism reaches your beliefs through causally inert consciousness—which means it doesn't reach them at all

This makes epiphenomenalism epistemically self-undermining. Not logically contradictory—it could still be true—but impossible to hold *rationally*. Anyone who claims to believe epiphenomenalism on the basis of evidence must be wrong about something.

## Argument 2: The Evolutionary Objection

**Premise 1**: Consciousness exists as a natural phenomenon in biological organisms.

**Premise 2**: Natural selection operates on traits that affect survival and reproduction.

**Premise 3**: If consciousness is epiphenomenal, it has no effects on behavior and thus no effects on survival or reproduction.

**Premise 4**: Traits without fitness effects cannot be selected for.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism cannot explain why consciousness evolved.

William James raised this objection over a century ago. If consciousness does nothing, why do we have it?

The epiphenomenalist response: the *brain states* that produce consciousness were selected; consciousness itself is just a byproduct. The neural structures that make us flee predators were advantageous; that these structures also produce fear experience is incidental.

This response has two problems:

**The correlation problem**: Why does consciousness *track* adaptive features? It would be quite a coincidence if causally inert consciousness just happened to accompany exactly those brain states that produce adaptive behavior. Without causal connection, why should pain accompany tissue damage rather than, say, pleasant surprises? Why should fear accompany threats rather than meals?

The epiphenomenalist must posit systematic correlation without causal explanation—a brute correlation between phenomenal states and functional states that extends across the entire animal kingdom. This is not impossible, but it is unexplained.

**The complexity problem**: Consciousness appears to have elaborate structure—not just present or absent but richly varied in content, intensity, and character. Why would evolution produce this elaborate epiphenomenal architecture? The neural machinery that generates conscious experience is metabolically expensive. If consciousness does nothing, this is pure waste—as if evolution built elaborate decorative features that confer no advantage.

Interactionism explains both. Consciousness tracks adaptive features because consciousness *causes* adaptive responses. Fear accompanies threats because fear causes avoidance. The elaborate structure exists because it serves a function.

## Argument 3: The Knowledge Argument Reversed

**Premise 1**: Mary, the colour scientist, learns something new upon seeing red for the first time—what red looks like.

**Premise 2**: If this new knowledge is causally inert, it cannot affect her subsequent behavior.

**Premise 3**: Yet Mary behaves differently after seeing red—she can recognize, describe, imagine, and respond to red experiences.

**Premise 4**: Her changed behavior must be caused by something.

**Conclusion**: Either the new phenomenal knowledge causes her behavior, or epiphenomenalism requires an unexplained coincidence.

The [[knowledge-argument]] is usually directed against physicalism. But it also challenges epiphenomenalism.

Mary, in her black-and-white room, knows everything physical about colour vision. She leaves the room and sees a red tomato. She learns something new—what red looks like.

Now consider her subsequent behavior. She says "So *this* is what red looks like!" She can now identify red objects by sight. She can imagine red when asked. Her behavior has changed.

The epiphenomenalist must say: the phenomenal knowledge (what red looks like) is not what causes her new abilities. Some neural state causes both the phenomenal knowledge and the behavioral changes. The correlation is not causal.

But this is strange. The most natural explanation of Mary's new abilities is that they're caused by her new knowledge. She can recognize red because she *knows what it looks like*. Epiphenomenalism forces us to deny this natural explanation and posit pre-established harmony between phenomenal states and behavioral capacities.

## Argument 4: Introspection Becomes Inexplicable

**Premise 1**: We have introspective access to our conscious states—we can attend to, report on, and reason about our experiences.

**Premise 2**: Introspection is a causal process—attention is directed, information is accessed, reports are generated.

**Premise 3**: If consciousness causes nothing, it cannot causally contribute to the introspective process.

**Premise 4**: But introspection is supposed to be *about* consciousness.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism makes introspection inexplicable—a process about a subject that has no causal role in the process.

We normally understand introspection as consciousness examining itself. You turn your attention inward, notice you're in pain, and report "I'm in pain." The pain seems to be both the object and the cause of the report.

Epiphenomenalism severs this connection. The pain is the object but not the cause. Your report is about the pain, but the pain doesn't cause the report. Neural states cause the report; the pain is just along for the ride.

This makes introspection unlike any other form of knowledge. When you see a red apple, the apple causally contributes to your visual experience. When you remember your birthday, the memory trace causally contributes to your recollection. But when you introspect your pain, the pain contributes nothing—the process is entirely neural, and the phenomenal object is causally disconnected.

If consciousness cannot influence even our *attention to* consciousness, how can introspective reports be reliable? The report and its object float free of each other.

## Argument 5: The Self-Knowledge Problem

**Premise 1**: We know that we are conscious.

**Premise 2**: Knowledge typically requires appropriate causal connection between the knower and the known.

**Premise 3**: If consciousness is epiphenomenal, there is no causal connection between our consciousness and our beliefs about consciousness.

**Conclusion**: Epiphenomenalism undermines self-knowledge of consciousness.

You know you're in pain. How do you know? The obvious answer: the pain itself informs you. The pain causes the belief that you're in pain.

Epiphenomenalism says: No. The pain causes nothing. Your belief is caused by the neural state that also causes the pain. The pain and the belief are co-effects of a common cause; the pain doesn't cause the belief.

But this is strange as an account of self-knowledge. We normally think we know our own minds *because* our mental states cause our beliefs about them. I know I'm imagining a red apple because the imagining causes the belief that I'm imagining. Epiphenomenalism severs this connection and leaves self-knowledge unexplained.

This connects to the self-stultification argument. If consciousness can't cause beliefs, beliefs about consciousness become mysterious—correct by coincidence rather than by design.

## The Cumulative Case

| Argument | What It Shows |
|----------|---------------|
| Self-Stultification | Epiphenomenalism cannot be rationally believed on the basis of introspective evidence |
| Evolutionary Objection | Epiphenomenalism cannot explain why consciousness exists |
| Knowledge Argument Reversed | Epiphenomenalism requires unexplained correlation between phenomenal states and behavioral changes |
| Introspection Problem | Epiphenomenalism makes introspection inexplicable |
| Self-Knowledge Problem | Epiphenomenalism undermines knowledge of our own minds |

Arguments 1 and 5 are epistemological—they show that accepting epiphenomenalism undermines the very grounds for believing it. Arguments 2 and 3 show that epiphenomenalism requires implausible coincidences. Argument 4 shows that epiphenomenalism cannot account for our most basic cognitive access to consciousness.

Together, they show that epiphenomenalism is not merely wrong but *self-undermining*.

## The Motivation for Epiphenomenalism

Why would anyone accept such a problematic view? The answer is [[causal-closure]]: the principle that every physical event has a sufficient physical cause.

If causal closure is true, and if consciousness is not physical, then consciousness cannot cause physical events—physical causes pre-empt mental causes. Epiphenomenalism follows as the least bad option: deny mental causation rather than deny that consciousness exists or reduce it to physics.

the project's response: deny causal closure at quantum indeterminacies. The [[measurement-problem]] shows that quantum mechanics does not specify which outcome occurs—it provides probabilities, not determinations. At these points, physics is genuinely incomplete. Consciousness can cause physical events precisely where physics leaves room.

This is the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet: consciousness biases quantum outcomes without violating conservation laws. No energy is injected; outcomes physics already permits are selected. This preserves what's true in causal closure (physics explains physical events where physics determines them) while denying what's false (physics determines everything).

## Relation to this project's Perspective

The arguments against epiphenomenalism directly support the project's framework:

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]**: The self-stultification argument shows consciousness must cause behavior. Our reports about consciousness must be caused by consciousness, or they cannot be trusted. The tenet that consciousness "selects among superposed neural states" follows.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]**: the project accepts that consciousness is irreducible to physics—a point epiphenomenalism also accepts. But dualism alone doesn't require causation. The arguments here show that dualism must be *interactionist* dualism.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]**: The quantum framework provides *how* mental causation occurs without the problems epiphenomenalism tries to avoid. Consciousness doesn't violate causal closure by injecting energy; it operates where causal closure doesn't apply.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]**: Epiphenomenalism might seem simpler—no mysterious downward causation. But a theory that explains nothing is not parsimonious. Epiphenomenalism explains correlations between consciousness and behavior only by brute coincidence. Interactionism explains them by causation.

## Further Reading

- [[epiphenomenalism]] — The view examined in detail
- [[mental-causation]] — Kim's exclusion argument and responses
- [[causal-closure]] — The principle motivating epiphenomenalism
- [[interactionist-dualism]] — The positive case for interaction
- [[quantum-consciousness]] — How mental causation could work
- [[knowledge-argument]] — Mary's Room and what it shows
- [[tenets]] — the project's foundational commitments

## References

- Chalmers, D. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Huxley, T.H. (1874). "On the Hypothesis that Animals are Automata, and its History."
- Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. *Philosophical Quarterly*, 32, 127-136.
- James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Henry Holt.
- Kim, J. (1998). *Mind in a Physical World*. MIT Press.
- Robinson, W.S. (2019). Epiphenomenalism. *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
