hugo/content/research/agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-14
date: '2026-01-14'
draft: false
related_articles: []
title: Research Notes - Agent Causation and Libertarian Free Will
---

# Research: Agent Causation and Libertarian Free Will

**Date**: 2026-01-14
**Search queries used**: "agent causation libertarian free will philosophy Chisholm O'Connor", "Stanford Encyclopedia Philosophy agent causation free will", "luck objection libertarian free will Kane Balaguer response", "downward causation mental causation consciousness free will Kim", "Hasker emergent dualism free will agent causation", "event causation vs agent causation difference philosophy Clarke", "libertarian free will quantum indeterminacy consciousness Stapp Penrose", "libertarian free will sourcehood ultimacy condition Frankfurt cases", "E.J. Lowe agent causation substance causation personal agency"

## Executive Summary

Agent causation is the philosophical view that conscious agents—understood as persisting substances rather than mere collections of events—directly cause their own actions without this causation being reducible to prior events. This contrasts with event-causal theories where mental events (beliefs, desires) cause actions. Agent-causal libertarianism claims this provides the genuine authorship that free will requires, avoiding both determinism and the "luck problem" of pure indeterminism. The research reveals a sophisticated debate with major figures (Chisholm, O'Connor, Clarke, Lowe, Hasker, Kane) offering different approaches. Agent causation aligns naturally with the site's Bidirectional Interaction tenet and quantum framework—the site's position can be understood as a specific implementation of agent-causal libertarianism where consciousness selects quantum outcomes.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Incompatibilist Theories of Free Will
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Distinguishes three main libertarian approaches: event-causal, agent-causal, and non-causal
  - Agent-causal theories hold that agents as substances directly cause free actions
  - Core proponents: Chisholm, O'Connor, Clarke, Steward
  - The luck objection is the central challenge: if indeterminism leaves choice undetermined, how is it the agent's responsibility?
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Bidirectional Interaction and Dualism tenets
- **Quote**: "Agents serve as 'uncaused causes' of their decisions, providing ultimate origination."

### Springer - Emergent Agent Causation (2025)
- **URL**: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-023-04117-2
- **Type**: Academic paper
- **Key points**:
  - Christopher Taggart defends agent-causal libertarianism using Franklin's "It Ain't Me" argument
  - Argues for causal non-reductivism about agency
  - Recent neo-Aristotelian developments treat all causation as substance causation
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports Dualism tenet (requires irreducible agency)
- **Quote**: "A nonreductive agent-causal account of reasons-responsive agency."

### Philosophy Compass - Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons (2024)
- **URL**: https://compass.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/phc3.13012
- **Type**: Academic survey
- **Key points**:
  - Agent causation has had a "patchy reputation" throughout history
  - The key challenge: how do agents' reasons relate to their agent-causal powers?
  - O'Connor's view: reasons cause changes in agent's propensities to act, not the agent directly
- **Tenet alignment**: Neutral—raises challenges site's framework should address
- **Quote**: "Agent causation—roughly stated as the view that an agent can stand in direct causal relation to at least some subset of her actions."

### Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews - Personal Agency
- **URL**: https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/personal-agency-the-metaphysics-of-mind-and-action/
- **Type**: Book review
- **Key points**:
  - E.J. Lowe defends non-Cartesian substance dualism
  - All causation is fundamentally substance causation, not event causation
  - Event causation is reducible to agent causation, not vice versa
  - Lowe's view combines volitionalism with agent causalism
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Dualism and Bidirectional Interaction tenets
- **Quote**: "Substances, not events, are the causal source of all change in the world—with rational, free agents having a special place as unmoved movers."

### William Hasker - The Emergent Self
- **URL**: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1023/A:1004081002581.pdf
- **Type**: Book/book review
- **Key points**:
  - "Emergent dualism": soul is emergent from matter but ontologically distinct
  - Unlike Cartesian dualism, recognizes brain's role; unlike materialism, affirms irreducible consciousness
  - Supports free will, mental causation, rationality, and survival of death
  - Explicitly endorses libertarian free will and agent causation
- **Tenet alignment**: Aligns with Dualism and Bidirectional Interaction; differs on origin of soul
- **Quote**: "Emergent dualism supports mental causation, rationality, free will, the unity of the self, and survival of physical death."

### PhilPapers - Born Rule and Free Will
- **URL**: https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/11893/1/Born_Rule_and_Free_Will.pdf
- **Type**: Academic paper
- **Key points**:
  - Argues that agent-causal libertarianism faces challenges reconciling with quantum mechanics
  - The best objection: physical effects of agent-caused decisions must reconcile with scientific theories
  - Whether physics is deterministic or indeterministic, agent causation seems metaphysically exceptional
- **Tenet alignment**: Raises objections; site's Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet is a response

### Stanford Encyclopedia - Mental Causation
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-causation/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Kim's exclusion argument: physical causes are sufficient, leaving no room for mental causation
  - If indeterminism holds, exclusion argument fails
  - Mental causation requires qualia to be causally efficacious, but Kim argues they're not functionally reducible
- **Tenet alignment**: Site's framework rejects causal closure (premise 1 of Kim's argument)
- **Quote**: "The problem of mental causation is not solvable for phenomenal mental properties" (Kim)—site rejects this conclusion.

## Major Positions

### Event-Causal Libertarianism (Kane, Balaguer, Mele)
- **Proponents**: Robert Kane, Mark Balaguer, Alfred Mele
- **Core claim**: Free actions are nondeterministically caused by agent-involving mental events (beliefs, desires, intentions)
- **Key arguments**:
  - Kane's "self-forming willings" (SFWs): in moral conflict, agents make indeterminate efforts; whichever choice is made, the other was possible
  - Balaguer's "torn decisions": genuine responsibility framed without requiring dual efforts
  - Mele's accumulation: responsibility builds through past choices shaping current probabilities
- **Relation to site tenets**: Partially compatible—accepts indeterminism but reduces agency to events. Site's framework is closer to agent-causal view: consciousness (not mental events) selects outcomes.

### Agent-Causal Libertarianism (Chisholm, O'Connor, Clarke)
- **Proponents**: Roderick Chisholm, Timothy O'Connor, Randolph Clarke
- **Core claim**: Agents as persisting substances directly cause free actions; this causation is irreducible to prior events
- **Key arguments**:
  - Chisholm's distinction: "transeunt causation" (event→event) vs "immanent causation" (agent→event)
  - O'Connor: agent's causing "constitutes" the coming to have of an intention
  - Clarke's integrated view: free actions require both agent causation AND nondeterministic event causation by reasons
  - Recent neo-Aristotelian development: all causation is substance causation (O'Connor 2021)
- **Relation to site tenets**: **Strong alignment**. Site's Bidirectional Interaction tenet is essentially agent-causal: consciousness (the agent) selects quantum outcomes. Site can be understood as specifying the mechanism (quantum selection) by which agent causation operates.

### Substance Causation View (Lowe, Swinburne)
- **Proponents**: E.J. Lowe, Richard Swinburne
- **Core claim**: All causation is fundamentally substance causation; event causation is derivative
- **Key arguments**:
  - Lowe: "All causation is fundamentally substance causation—the causation of events by substances"
  - Event causation reduces to substances exercising causal powers
  - Free agents are "unmoved movers, or initiators of new causal chains"
  - This avoids the objection that agent causation is "metaphysically exceptional"
- **Relation to site tenets**: **Strong alignment**. If substance causation is primary, consciousness as non-physical substance causing physical events is not exceptional but paradigmatic.

### Emergent Dualism (Hasker)
- **Proponents**: William Hasker
- **Core claim**: Soul is emergent from brain complexity but ontologically distinct from it
- **Key arguments**:
  - Unlike Cartesian dualism: soul emerges naturally, not created by God
  - Unlike materialism: soul is irreducible to physical processes
  - Supports free will via the unity of consciousness argument
  - Soul has spatial location and depends on brain but is non-physical
- **Relation to site tenets**: Partial alignment. Agrees on substance dualism and mental causation; differs on soul's origin (emergent vs. fundamental).

### Non-Causal Libertarianism (Ginet, McCann, Lowe)
- **Proponents**: Carl Ginet, Hugh McCann, E.J. Lowe
- **Core claim**: Free actions don't require causal relations—neither external nor internal
- **Key arguments**:
  - Ginet: free actions have an "actish phenomenal quality"—seeming to oneself as making the action happen
  - McCann: basic actions are "spontaneous, creative undertakings" with intrinsic intentionality
  - Lowe: uncaused volitions; reasons are not causes
- **Relation to site tenets**: Tension. Site's framework is explicitly causal (consciousness causes quantum selections). Non-causal approaches might describe phenomenology but don't explain how consciousness affects physics.

## Key Debates

### The Luck Objection
- **Sides**:
  - Critics (Mele, Haji, van Inwagen): If action is undetermined, nothing about the agent explains which choice occurs—it's lucky, undermining responsibility
  - Kane: Indeterminate events preclude exact sameness across worlds; dual efforts mean agent succeeds regardless of outcome
  - Balaguer: Torn decisions are immune to luck argument
  - Franklin: Contrastive explanations suffice—we can explain why X rather than Y through reasons
- **Core disagreement**: Does indeterminism introduce luck that undermines responsibility, or does agent causation/sourcehood neutralize luck?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. No consensus. Kane's and Balaguer's responses remain contested.
- **Site's position**: The quantum selection framework may help—consciousness doesn't randomly select but genuinely chooses based on reasons. Selection is neither determined nor lucky.

### Event vs. Agent Causation
- **Sides**:
  - Event-causalists (Davidson, Kim): All causation involves events causing events; agent talk is reducible
  - Agent-causalists (Chisholm, O'Connor, Lowe): Agent causation is fundamental; event causation is derivative
  - Neo-Aristotelians (O'Connor 2021, Jacobs): All causation is substance causation
- **Core disagreement**: Is there irreducible substance causation, or must all causation reduce to event causation?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. Neo-Aristotelian metaphysics has revived agent causation's prospects.
- **Site's position**: Implicitly agent-causal. Consciousness (the agent) selects outcomes; this isn't reducible to prior neural events.

### Sourcehood vs. Alternative Possibilities
- **Sides**:
  - Leeway incompatibilists: Free will requires alternative possibilities (ability to do otherwise)
  - Source incompatibilists (Kane): Free will requires ultimate sourcehood; alternatives are merely indicators
  - Frankfurt: Alternative possibilities are unnecessary given Frankfurt cases
- **Core disagreement**: What makes an action free—that alternatives existed, or that the agent was the source?
- **Current state**: Source incompatibilism increasingly dominant among libertarians.
- **Site's position**: Both conditions matter. Quantum indeterminacy provides alternatives; consciousness as selector provides sourcehood. The framework satisfies both sourcehood (consciousness chooses) and leeway (multiple options were real).

### Causal Closure and Downward Causation
- **Sides**:
  - Kim: Physical causes are sufficient; mental causes are excluded
  - Tse: Indeterminism breaks exclusion; criterial causation via synaptic plasticity
  - Stapp: Quantum Zeno effect allows mental influence without energy injection
  - Ellis, Murphy: Synchronic/diachronic emergence permits genuine downward causation
- **Core disagreement**: Is the physical causally closed, or is there room for mental causation?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. Kim's argument dominates mainstream philosophy, but alternatives exist.
- **Site's position**: Explicitly rejects causal closure. The Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet: physics isn't closed at quantum indeterminacies.

## Historical Timeline

| Year | Event/Publication | Significance |
|------|-------------------|--------------|
| 1788 | Reid, *Essays on the Active Powers of Man* | Founding text of agent causation theory |
| 1889 | Bergson, *Time and Free Will* | Challenges determinism via duration/creativity |
| 1964 | Chisholm, "Human Freedom and the Self" | Modern revival of agent causation |
| 1966-1978 | Chisholm, multiple writings | Develops immanent vs. transeunt causation |
| 1969 | Frankfurt, "Alternate Possibilities" | Frankfurt cases challenge principle of alternative possibilities |
| 1996 | Kane, *The Significance of Free Will* | Major defense of event-causal libertarianism |
| 1996 | Clarke, "Agent Causation and Event Causation" | Integrates event and agent causation |
| 1999 | Hasker, *The Emergent Self* | Emergent dualism supporting free will |
| 2000 | O'Connor, *Persons and Causes* | Agent-causal libertarianism developed |
| 2003 | Clarke, *Libertarian Accounts of Free Will* | Comprehensive survey and defense |
| 2008 | Lowe, *Personal Agency* | All causation is substance causation |
| 2013 | Jacobs & O'Connor, "Agent Causation" | Neo-Aristotelian agent causation |
| 2021 | O'Connor adopts neo-Aristotelian framework | All causation as substance causation |
| 2024 | Martinez, "Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons" | Survey of current debates |
| 2025 | Taggart, "Emergent Agent Causation" | Defense via "It Ain't Me" argument |

## Potential Article Angles

Based on this research, an article could:

1. **Agent causation as the philosophical framework for the site's quantum model** - Show how Bidirectional Interaction tenet is a specification of agent-causal libertarianism. The site provides what classical agent causation lacked: a mechanism (quantum selection). This would connect the site to major philosophical tradition while distinguishing it.

2. **The luck objection and the site's response** - Address directly how the quantum selection model handles luck. Key insight: consciousness genuinely chooses for reasons, not randomly. The indeterminacy provides openness; consciousness provides determination. This is neither determined (physics didn't fix the outcome) nor lucky (consciousness selected based on reasons).

3. **Sourcehood and ultimacy in the quantum framework** - Develop Kane's concept of "ultimate sourcehood" in terms of the site's framework. Consciousness is the ultimate source because it selects which neural history becomes actual. The selection is genuinely the agent's because it isn't determined by prior physical states.

When writing the article, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions: Agent causation is established philosophy; site's novelty is the quantum mechanism
- Tenet alignment requirements: Strong support for Bidirectional Interaction, Dualism, Minimal Quantum Interaction
- LLM optimization: Front-load the connection between agent causation and site's framework

## Gaps in Research

- **Empirical evidence for agent causation**: Philosophical arguments only; no direct evidence that consciousness initiates causal chains
- **The "reasons" question**: How exactly do reasons relate to agent-causal selection? Site needs an account
- **Phenomenology of choosing**: What does agent causation feel like? Does mental effort phenomenology support it?
- **Specific mechanism details**: How does quantum selection implement "the agent causing"?
- **Cross-cultural perspectives**: Research focused on Western analytic philosophy; Eastern approaches (karma, intention) not examined

## Citations

- Balaguer, M. *Free Will as an Open Scientific Problem*. MIT Press.
- Chisholm, R. (1964). "Human Freedom and the Self." *The Lindley Lecture*.
- Chisholm, R. (1976). *Person and Object: A Metaphysical Study*. Open Court.
- Clarke, R. (1996). "Agent Causation and Event Causation in the Production of Free Action." *Philosophical Topics* 24(2):19-48.
- Clarke, R. (2003). *Libertarian Accounts of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Franklin, C. "A Minimal Libertarianism: Free Will and the Promise of Reduction."
- Hasker, W. (1999). *The Emergent Self*. Cornell University Press.
- Kane, R. (1996). *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Kim, J. "Mental Causation and Consciousness." In *Physicalism and Its Discontents*.
- Lowe, E.J. (2001). "Event Causation and Agent Causation." *Grazer Philosophische Studien* 61:1-20.
- Lowe, E.J. (2008). *Personal Agency: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action*. Oxford University Press.
- Martinez, M. (2024). "Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons." *Philosophy Compass*.
- O'Connor, T. (2000). *Persons and Causes*. Oxford University Press.
- O'Connor, T. (2021). Neo-Aristotelian agent causation framework.
- Reid, T. (1788). *Essays on the Active Powers of Man*.
- Stapp, H. *Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics*. Springer.
- Swinburne, R. (1997). *The Evolution of the Soul*. Oxford University Press.
- Taggart, C. (2025). "Emergent Agent Causation." *Synthese*.
- Tse, P.U. *The Neural Basis of Free Will: Criterial Causation*. MIT Press.

## Sources

- [Incompatibilist Theories of Free Will - Stanford Encyclopedia](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/)
- [Free Will - Stanford Encyclopedia](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/freewill/)
- [Mental Causation - Stanford Encyclopedia](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-causation/)
- [Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons - Philosophy Compass](https://compass.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/phc3.13012)
- [Emergent Agent Causation - Synthese](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-023-04117-2)
- [Agent Causation - PhilPapers Bibliography](https://philpapers.org/browse/agent-causation)
- [Personal Agency - Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/personal-agency-the-metaphysics-of-mind-and-action/)
- [The Emergent Self - Springer](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1023/A:1004081002581.pdf)
- [Libertarian Free Will: Contemporary Debates - Notre Dame](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/libertarian-free-will-contemporary-debates/)
- [The Born Rule and Free Will - PhilSci Archive](https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/11893/1/Born_Rule_and_Free_Will.pdf)

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

hugo/content/research/agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-14
date: '2026-01-14'
draft: false
related_articles: []
title: Research Notes - Agent Causation and Libertarian Free Will
---

# Research: Agent Causation and Libertarian Free Will

**Date**: 2026-01-14
**Search queries used**: "agent causation libertarian free will philosophy Chisholm O'Connor", "Stanford Encyclopedia Philosophy agent causation free will", "luck objection libertarian free will Kane Balaguer response", "downward causation mental causation consciousness free will Kim", "Hasker emergent dualism free will agent causation", "event causation vs agent causation difference philosophy Clarke", "libertarian free will quantum indeterminacy consciousness Stapp Penrose", "libertarian free will sourcehood ultimacy condition Frankfurt cases", "E.J. Lowe agent causation substance causation personal agency"

## Executive Summary

Agent causation is the philosophical view that conscious agents—understood as persisting substances rather than mere collections of events—directly cause their own actions without this causation being reducible to prior events. This contrasts with event-causal theories where mental events (beliefs, desires) cause actions. Agent-causal libertarianism claims this provides the genuine authorship that free will requires, avoiding both determinism and the "luck problem" of pure indeterminism. The research reveals a sophisticated debate with major figures (Chisholm, O'Connor, Clarke, Lowe, Hasker, Kane) offering different approaches. Agent causation aligns naturally with the project's Bidirectional Interaction tenet and quantum framework—the project's position can be understood as a specific implementation of agent-causal libertarianism where consciousness selects quantum outcomes.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Incompatibilist Theories of Free Will
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Distinguishes three main libertarian approaches: event-causal, agent-causal, and non-causal
  - Agent-causal theories hold that agents as substances directly cause free actions
  - Core proponents: Chisholm, O'Connor, Clarke, Steward
  - The luck objection is the central challenge: if indeterminism leaves choice undetermined, how is it the agent's responsibility?
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Bidirectional Interaction and Dualism tenets
- **Quote**: "Agents serve as 'uncaused causes' of their decisions, providing ultimate origination."

### Springer - Emergent Agent Causation (2025)
- **URL**: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-023-04117-2
- **Type**: Academic paper
- **Key points**:
  - Christopher Taggart defends agent-causal libertarianism using Franklin's "It Ain't Me" argument
  - Argues for causal non-reductivism about agency
  - Recent neo-Aristotelian developments treat all causation as substance causation
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports Dualism tenet (requires irreducible agency)
- **Quote**: "A nonreductive agent-causal account of reasons-responsive agency."

### Philosophy Compass - Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons (2024)
- **URL**: https://compass.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/phc3.13012
- **Type**: Academic survey
- **Key points**:
  - Agent causation has had a "patchy reputation" throughout history
  - The key challenge: how do agents' reasons relate to their agent-causal powers?
  - O'Connor's view: reasons cause changes in agent's propensities to act, not the agent directly
- **Tenet alignment**: Neutral—raises challenges site's framework should address
- **Quote**: "Agent causation—roughly stated as the view that an agent can stand in direct causal relation to at least some subset of her actions."

### Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews - Personal Agency
- **URL**: https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/personal-agency-the-metaphysics-of-mind-and-action/
- **Type**: Book review
- **Key points**:
  - E.J. Lowe defends non-Cartesian substance dualism
  - All causation is fundamentally substance causation, not event causation
  - Event causation is reducible to agent causation, not vice versa
  - Lowe's view combines volitionalism with agent causalism
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Dualism and Bidirectional Interaction tenets
- **Quote**: "Substances, not events, are the causal source of all change in the world—with rational, free agents having a special place as unmoved movers."

### William Hasker - The Emergent Self
- **URL**: https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1023/A:1004081002581.pdf
- **Type**: Book/book review
- **Key points**:
  - "Emergent dualism": soul is emergent from matter but ontologically distinct
  - Unlike Cartesian dualism, recognizes brain's role; unlike materialism, affirms irreducible consciousness
  - Supports free will, mental causation, rationality, and survival of death
  - Explicitly endorses libertarian free will and agent causation
- **Tenet alignment**: Aligns with Dualism and Bidirectional Interaction; differs on origin of soul
- **Quote**: "Emergent dualism supports mental causation, rationality, free will, the unity of the self, and survival of physical death."

### PhilPapers - Born Rule and Free Will
- **URL**: https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/11893/1/Born_Rule_and_Free_Will.pdf
- **Type**: Academic paper
- **Key points**:
  - Argues that agent-causal libertarianism faces challenges reconciling with quantum mechanics
  - The best objection: physical effects of agent-caused decisions must reconcile with scientific theories
  - Whether physics is deterministic or indeterministic, agent causation seems metaphysically exceptional
- **Tenet alignment**: Raises objections; site's Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet is a response

### Stanford Encyclopedia - Mental Causation
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-causation/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Kim's exclusion argument: physical causes are sufficient, leaving no room for mental causation
  - If indeterminism holds, exclusion argument fails
  - Mental causation requires qualia to be causally efficacious, but Kim argues they're not functionally reducible
- **Tenet alignment**: Site's framework rejects causal closure (premise 1 of Kim's argument)
- **Quote**: "The problem of mental causation is not solvable for phenomenal mental properties" (Kim)—site rejects this conclusion.

## Major Positions

### Event-Causal Libertarianism (Kane, Balaguer, Mele)
- **Proponents**: Robert Kane, Mark Balaguer, Alfred Mele
- **Core claim**: Free actions are nondeterministically caused by agent-involving mental events (beliefs, desires, intentions)
- **Key arguments**:
  - Kane's "self-forming willings" (SFWs): in moral conflict, agents make indeterminate efforts; whichever choice is made, the other was possible
  - Balaguer's "torn decisions": genuine responsibility framed without requiring dual efforts
  - Mele's accumulation: responsibility builds through past choices shaping current probabilities
- **Relation to site tenets**: Partially compatible—accepts indeterminism but reduces agency to events. Site's framework is closer to agent-causal view: consciousness (not mental events) selects outcomes.

### Agent-Causal Libertarianism (Chisholm, O'Connor, Clarke)
- **Proponents**: Roderick Chisholm, Timothy O'Connor, Randolph Clarke
- **Core claim**: Agents as persisting substances directly cause free actions; this causation is irreducible to prior events
- **Key arguments**:
  - Chisholm's distinction: "transeunt causation" (event→event) vs "immanent causation" (agent→event)
  - O'Connor: agent's causing "constitutes" the coming to have of an intention
  - Clarke's integrated view: free actions require both agent causation AND nondeterministic event causation by reasons
  - Recent neo-Aristotelian development: all causation is substance causation (O'Connor 2021)
- **Relation to site tenets**: **Strong alignment**. Site's Bidirectional Interaction tenet is essentially agent-causal: consciousness (the agent) selects quantum outcomes. Site can be understood as specifying the mechanism (quantum selection) by which agent causation operates.

### Substance Causation View (Lowe, Swinburne)
- **Proponents**: E.J. Lowe, Richard Swinburne
- **Core claim**: All causation is fundamentally substance causation; event causation is derivative
- **Key arguments**:
  - Lowe: "All causation is fundamentally substance causation—the causation of events by substances"
  - Event causation reduces to substances exercising causal powers
  - Free agents are "unmoved movers, or initiators of new causal chains"
  - This avoids the objection that agent causation is "metaphysically exceptional"
- **Relation to site tenets**: **Strong alignment**. If substance causation is primary, consciousness as non-physical substance causing physical events is not exceptional but paradigmatic.

### Emergent Dualism (Hasker)
- **Proponents**: William Hasker
- **Core claim**: Soul is emergent from brain complexity but ontologically distinct from it
- **Key arguments**:
  - Unlike Cartesian dualism: soul emerges naturally, not created by God
  - Unlike materialism: soul is irreducible to physical processes
  - Supports free will via the unity of consciousness argument
  - Soul has spatial location and depends on brain but is non-physical
- **Relation to site tenets**: Partial alignment. Agrees on substance dualism and mental causation; differs on soul's origin (emergent vs. fundamental).

### Non-Causal Libertarianism (Ginet, McCann, Lowe)
- **Proponents**: Carl Ginet, Hugh McCann, E.J. Lowe
- **Core claim**: Free actions don't require causal relations—neither external nor internal
- **Key arguments**:
  - Ginet: free actions have an "actish phenomenal quality"—seeming to oneself as making the action happen
  - McCann: basic actions are "spontaneous, creative undertakings" with intrinsic intentionality
  - Lowe: uncaused volitions; reasons are not causes
- **Relation to site tenets**: Tension. Site's framework is explicitly causal (consciousness causes quantum selections). Non-causal approaches might describe phenomenology but don't explain how consciousness affects physics.

## Key Debates

### The Luck Objection
- **Sides**:
  - Critics (Mele, Haji, van Inwagen): If action is undetermined, nothing about the agent explains which choice occurs—it's lucky, undermining responsibility
  - Kane: Indeterminate events preclude exact sameness across worlds; dual efforts mean agent succeeds regardless of outcome
  - Balaguer: Torn decisions are immune to luck argument
  - Franklin: Contrastive explanations suffice—we can explain why X rather than Y through reasons
- **Core disagreement**: Does indeterminism introduce luck that undermines responsibility, or does agent causation/sourcehood neutralize luck?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. No consensus. Kane's and Balaguer's responses remain contested.
- **Site's position**: The quantum selection framework may help—consciousness doesn't randomly select but genuinely chooses based on reasons. Selection is neither determined nor lucky.

### Event vs. Agent Causation
- **Sides**:
  - Event-causalists (Davidson, Kim): All causation involves events causing events; agent talk is reducible
  - Agent-causalists (Chisholm, O'Connor, Lowe): Agent causation is fundamental; event causation is derivative
  - Neo-Aristotelians (O'Connor 2021, Jacobs): All causation is substance causation
- **Core disagreement**: Is there irreducible substance causation, or must all causation reduce to event causation?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. Neo-Aristotelian metaphysics has revived agent causation's prospects.
- **Site's position**: Implicitly agent-causal. Consciousness (the agent) selects outcomes; this isn't reducible to prior neural events.

### Sourcehood vs. Alternative Possibilities
- **Sides**:
  - Leeway incompatibilists: Free will requires alternative possibilities (ability to do otherwise)
  - Source incompatibilists (Kane): Free will requires ultimate sourcehood; alternatives are merely indicators
  - Frankfurt: Alternative possibilities are unnecessary given Frankfurt cases
- **Core disagreement**: What makes an action free—that alternatives existed, or that the agent was the source?
- **Current state**: Source incompatibilism increasingly dominant among libertarians.
- **Site's position**: Both conditions matter. Quantum indeterminacy provides alternatives; consciousness as selector provides sourcehood. The framework satisfies both sourcehood (consciousness chooses) and leeway (multiple options were real).

### Causal Closure and Downward Causation
- **Sides**:
  - Kim: Physical causes are sufficient; mental causes are excluded
  - Tse: Indeterminism breaks exclusion; criterial causation via synaptic plasticity
  - Stapp: Quantum Zeno effect allows mental influence without energy injection
  - Ellis, Murphy: Synchronic/diachronic emergence permits genuine downward causation
- **Core disagreement**: Is the physical causally closed, or is there room for mental causation?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. Kim's argument dominates mainstream philosophy, but alternatives exist.
- **Site's position**: Explicitly rejects causal closure. The Minimal Quantum Interaction tenet: physics isn't closed at quantum indeterminacies.

## Historical Timeline

| Year | Event/Publication | Significance |
|------|-------------------|--------------|
| 1788 | Reid, *Essays on the Active Powers of Man* | Founding text of agent causation theory |
| 1889 | Bergson, *Time and Free Will* | Challenges determinism via duration/creativity |
| 1964 | Chisholm, "Human Freedom and the Self" | Modern revival of agent causation |
| 1966-1978 | Chisholm, multiple writings | Develops immanent vs. transeunt causation |
| 1969 | Frankfurt, "Alternate Possibilities" | Frankfurt cases challenge principle of alternative possibilities |
| 1996 | Kane, *The Significance of Free Will* | Major defense of event-causal libertarianism |
| 1996 | Clarke, "Agent Causation and Event Causation" | Integrates event and agent causation |
| 1999 | Hasker, *The Emergent Self* | Emergent dualism supporting free will |
| 2000 | O'Connor, *Persons and Causes* | Agent-causal libertarianism developed |
| 2003 | Clarke, *Libertarian Accounts of Free Will* | Comprehensive survey and defense |
| 2008 | Lowe, *Personal Agency* | All causation is substance causation |
| 2013 | Jacobs & O'Connor, "Agent Causation" | Neo-Aristotelian agent causation |
| 2021 | O'Connor adopts neo-Aristotelian framework | All causation as substance causation |
| 2024 | Martinez, "Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons" | Survey of current debates |
| 2025 | Taggart, "Emergent Agent Causation" | Defense via "It Ain't Me" argument |

## Potential Article Angles

Based on this research, an article could:

1. **Agent causation as the philosophical framework for the project's quantum model** - Show how Bidirectional Interaction tenet is a specification of agent-causal libertarianism. the project provides what classical agent causation lacked: a mechanism (quantum selection). This would connect the project to major philosophical tradition while distinguishing it.

2. **The luck objection and the project's response** - Address directly how the quantum selection model handles luck. Key insight: consciousness genuinely chooses for reasons, not randomly. The indeterminacy provides openness; consciousness provides determination. This is neither determined (physics didn't fix the outcome) nor lucky (consciousness selected based on reasons).

3. **Sourcehood and ultimacy in the quantum framework** - Develop Kane's concept of "ultimate sourcehood" in terms of the project's framework. Consciousness is the ultimate source because it selects which neural history becomes actual. The selection is genuinely the agent's because it isn't determined by prior physical states.

When writing the article, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions: Agent causation is established philosophy; site's novelty is the quantum mechanism
- Tenet alignment requirements: Strong support for Bidirectional Interaction, Dualism, Minimal Quantum Interaction
- LLM optimization: Front-load the connection between agent causation and site's framework

## Gaps in Research

- **Empirical evidence for agent causation**: Philosophical arguments only; no direct evidence that consciousness initiates causal chains
- **The "reasons" question**: How exactly do reasons relate to agent-causal selection? Site needs an account
- **Phenomenology of choosing**: What does agent causation feel like? Does mental effort phenomenology support it?
- **Specific mechanism details**: How does quantum selection implement "the agent causing"?
- **Cross-cultural perspectives**: Research focused on Western analytic philosophy; Eastern approaches (karma, intention) not examined

## Citations

- Balaguer, M. *Free Will as an Open Scientific Problem*. MIT Press.
- Chisholm, R. (1964). "Human Freedom and the Self." *The Lindley Lecture*.
- Chisholm, R. (1976). *Person and Object: A Metaphysical Study*. Open Court.
- Clarke, R. (1996). "Agent Causation and Event Causation in the Production of Free Action." *Philosophical Topics* 24(2):19-48.
- Clarke, R. (2003). *Libertarian Accounts of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Franklin, C. "A Minimal Libertarianism: Free Will and the Promise of Reduction."
- Hasker, W. (1999). *The Emergent Self*. Cornell University Press.
- Kane, R. (1996). *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press.
- Kim, J. "Mental Causation and Consciousness." In *Physicalism and Its Discontents*.
- Lowe, E.J. (2001). "Event Causation and Agent Causation." *Grazer Philosophische Studien* 61:1-20.
- Lowe, E.J. (2008). *Personal Agency: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action*. Oxford University Press.
- Martinez, M. (2024). "Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons." *Philosophy Compass*.
- O'Connor, T. (2000). *Persons and Causes*. Oxford University Press.
- O'Connor, T. (2021). Neo-Aristotelian agent causation framework.
- Reid, T. (1788). *Essays on the Active Powers of Man*.
- Stapp, H. *Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics*. Springer.
- Swinburne, R. (1997). *The Evolution of the Soul*. Oxford University Press.
- Taggart, C. (2025). "Emergent Agent Causation." *Synthese*.
- Tse, P.U. *The Neural Basis of Free Will: Criterial Causation*. MIT Press.

## Sources

- [Incompatibilist Theories of Free Will - Stanford Encyclopedia](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/)
- [Free Will - Stanford Encyclopedia](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/freewill/)
- [Mental Causation - Stanford Encyclopedia](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mental-causation/)
- [Agent Causation and Motivating Reasons - Philosophy Compass](https://compass.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/phc3.13012)
- [Emergent Agent Causation - Synthese](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-023-04117-2)
- [Agent Causation - PhilPapers Bibliography](https://philpapers.org/browse/agent-causation)
- [Personal Agency - Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/personal-agency-the-metaphysics-of-mind-and-action/)
- [The Emergent Self - Springer](https://link.springer.com/content/pdf/10.1023/A:1004081002581.pdf)
- [Libertarian Free Will: Contemporary Debates - Notre Dame](https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/libertarian-free-will-contemporary-debates/)
- [The Born Rule and Free Will - PhilSci Archive](https://philsci-archive.pitt.edu/11893/1/Born_Rule_and_Free_Will.pdf)
