hugo/content/research/brain-specialness-boundary-2026-01-15.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-15
date: '2026-01-15'
draft: false
related_articles: []
title: Research Notes - Brain Specialness Boundary (Why Not Psychokinesis)
---

# Research: Brain Specialness Boundary (Why Not Psychokinesis)

**Date**: 2026-01-15
**Task source**: ChatGPT 5.2 Pro outer review - identified as implicit constraint needing explicit defense
**Search queries used**: "consciousness brain psychokinesis boundary interactionist dualism 2024 2025", "Stapp mind brain interface locality constraint", "mental causation own brain restricted locality consciousness quantum", "parapsychology psychokinesis critique quantum consciousness scientific skepticism"

## Executive Summary

The site's [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) + [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenets risk an embarrassing implication: if consciousness can bias quantum outcomes, why only in brains? Why can't consciousness move objects, predict the future, or affect random number generators at a distance?

This is the **brain specialness problem**: the site needs a principled boundary that permits consciousness to influence neural quantum events while ruling out parapsychological effects that lack empirical support and violate the site's commitment to scientific respectability.

This research examines candidate boundary conditions and their justifications. The key insight: **interface locality**—consciousness can only influence quantum systems already integrated into its control loop (attention, motor planning), not arbitrary external systems. This isn't an ad hoc restriction but follows from the nature of the proposed mechanism.

## The Problem Stated

If consciousness can bias quantum outcomes in the brain, what stops it from:
- Biasing random number generators (micro-PK)
- Influencing external quantum events (macro-PK)
- Accessing information about distant events (telepathy, remote viewing)
- Affecting future quantum events retroactively (precognition)

Parapsychology research claims to find small but statistically significant effects in some of these domains. The site cannot simply dismiss this research—but it also cannot endorse it without undermining its scientific credibility.

The challenge: articulate a boundary that:
1. Permits brain-internal quantum selection (as the framework requires)
2. Excludes brain-external quantum effects (as empirical null results suggest)
3. Doesn't seem arbitrary or ad hoc
4. Follows from the proposed mechanism itself

## Key Sources

### The Parapsychology Literature

**PEAR Lab (Princeton)**: Studied micro-PK effects on random number generators for 28 years (1979-2007). Results claimed small but significant deviations from chance in line with operator intention. Lab closed in 2007. Meta-analyses find effect sizes of ~0.0001-0.001—barely detectable statistically, never reliably replicable.

**Ganzfeld experiments**: Test telepathy/clairvoyance through sensory deprivation protocols. Mixed results; replication failures; methodological critiques.

**Global Consciousness Project**: Monitors random number generators worldwide for correlations with major world events. Claims significant deviations around 9/11, etc. Criticized for post-hoc analysis and selection effects.

**Scientific consensus**: Mainstream physics rejects PK claims. Mario Bunge: "Psychokinesis violates the principle that mind cannot act directly on matter... It also violates the principles of conservation of energy and momentum." Robert Park: "If the mind really could influence matter... it would be easy for parapsychologists to measure such a phenomenon by using the alleged psychokinetic power to deflect a microbalance—but the microbalance stubbornly refuses to budge."

### Non-Local Consciousness Theories (2024)

A 2024 IONS paper reviews "theories of non-local consciousness" that reject the constraint this research seeks to establish. These theories propose consciousness "extends beyond the body and the brain and need not be restricted by our usual notions."

**Relevance**: The site's framework is NOT a non-local consciousness theory. It proposes a specific, local interface: consciousness biases quantum outcomes in the brain's attention-controlled systems. This is crucial for avoiding the slide into parapsychology.

### Stapp on Mind-Brain Locality

Stapp's model places the mind-brain interface within the brain, following von Neumann's formulation where the observer-observed boundary can be placed anywhere convenient—Stapp places it at the brain level.

Key quote from Stapp (2015): "In the relativistic quantum field theory proposed by Tomonaga and Schwinger, instants 'now' are taken to be non-flat 3-dimensional continuous surfaces in 4-dimensional space-time... The mind-brain connection pertains to what is happening to the mind and the brain in such a **localized event**."

**Implication**: The mind-brain connection is **spatially localized** to the brain. This isn't an arbitrary restriction but follows from the physics Stapp employs.

### Mental Causation and Locality (2024)

A 2024 paper in Australasian Journal of Philosophy ("Mental Causation for Standard Dualists") examines how dualist mental causation can be defended given recent developments in causation theory. The paper addresses the "local causation" requirement:

**Local Causation Thesis**: "A property F of an event c is causally relevant to property G of event e only if F is an intrinsic property of c."

If mental properties are "local" in this sense—tied to specific brain events—then mental causation is similarly localized.

### The Embodiment Constraint

"Radical embodiment" views (Trends in Cognitive Sciences) argue that "the processes crucial for consciousness cut across the brain–body–world divisions"—but in a specific way. Consciousness is embodied in a particular body, not free-floating.

Filter theory likewise implies embodiment: consciousness is "filtered" or "received" through a specific brain, not broadcasting to any receiver.

## Candidate Boundary Conditions

### Boundary 1: Interface Locality

**Statement**: Consciousness can only influence quantum outcomes within neural systems that are:
1. Already integrated into the subject's conscious control loop
2. Spatially local to the brain

**Justification**:
- Stapp's Process 1 (posing questions) operates on the observer's own brain state representation
- The quantum Zeno mechanism requires repeated observation—possible only for systems already within attention
- You can't observe (in the quantum mechanical sense) systems you're not connected to

**What it excludes**:
- External random number generators (no integration into control loop)
- Other people's brains (different subjects)
- Distant quantum events (not local)

**What it permits**:
- Neural firing patterns in attention-controlled circuits
- Motor planning alternatives in motor cortex
- Possibly: own bodily processes mediated through interoception

### Boundary 2: Control Loop Integration

**Statement**: Consciousness can bias quantum outcomes only in systems where:
1. The outcome feeds back into conscious awareness
2. Intentional attention can be directed at the alternatives
3. The selection is part of goal-directed behavior

**Justification**:
- This is what distinguishes deliberate action from random biasing
- Stapp emphasizes that "prior to the choice to act there must be a representation in the brain of the projected consequences"
- No such representation exists for external random events

**What it excludes**:
- RNG experiments (no internal representation of alternatives)
- Remote viewing (no feedback loop from distant events)
- Spontaneous precognition (no goal-directed selection)

**What it permits**:
- Motor decisions with awareness of alternatives
- Attentional selection among represented options
- Any domain where consciousness "sees" the options before selecting

### Boundary 3: Developmental/Evolutionary Integration

**Statement**: Consciousness can influence only systems with which it has developed a functional relationship through:
1. Developmental wiring (the nervous system grew with this consciousness)
2. Learned motor-sensory loops (established through experience)

**Justification**:
- Evolution optimized the brain-consciousness interface over millions of years
- There's no evolutionary pressure to affect external quantum systems
- The interface is a product of embodied development, not a general power

**What it excludes**:
- Any system not developmentally integrated
- External devices (no neural wiring to them)
- Other organisms (different developmental history)

**What it permits**:
- Only the subject's own nervous system
- Possibly: learned tool use (where tools become "embodied" through practice)

### Boundary 4: Attention Scope

**Statement**: Consciousness can only influence quantum outcomes within the scope of attention, where attention is neurally realized as:
1. Frontoparietal network activation
2. Increased gain on specific neural populations
3. Repeated "observation" in Stapp's sense

**Justification**:
- The quantum Zeno mechanism requires rapid repeated observation
- Attention is the mechanism that implements such observation
- You can only attend to what's within your perceptual/motor systems

**What it excludes**:
- Anything outside current attention scope
- External systems not represented in brain
- Unconscious processes (no attention directed there)

**What it permits**:
- Currently attended action alternatives
- Focused cognitive tasks
- Motor preparation under conscious guidance

## The Parapsychology Problem

### Why the Site Can't Simply Ignore PK Research

If the site's framework is correct, some form of PK *should* exist—at least within the brain. The question is whether it extends beyond the brain.

Arguments that it might:
- If consciousness can bias quantum outcomes, why exactly at the neural boundary?
- Quantum non-locality suggests consciousness might not be spatially constrained
- Some parapsychology results claim small but real effects

Arguments that it doesn't:
- Decades of PK research show no reliable, replicable effects
- Physical conservation laws would be violated by macroscopic PK
- The site's mechanism (attention → Zeno effect → neural states) doesn't extend to external systems

### The Site's Position

**Proposed stance**: The site's framework makes no prediction about external PK because:

1. The mechanism is **neural-specific**: The quantum Zeno mechanism operates through attention, which is neurally implemented
2. The interface is **embodied**: Consciousness interfaces with *its* brain through developmental/evolutionary integration
3. **Absence of evidence** suggests external effects, if any, are below detection threshold
4. The site **remains agnostic** on external PK—it doesn't claim to disprove it, but doesn't require or predict it

This is intellectually honest: the framework predicts neural selection, not universal PK. External PK would require additional mechanisms the framework doesn't specify.

## Key Insight: The Boundary Isn't Arbitrary

The boundary between brain-internal and brain-external selection isn't an ad hoc restriction added to avoid embarrassment. It follows from the structure of the proposed mechanism:

1. **Attention is neurally implemented**: You can't attend to a distant RNG the way you attend to motor alternatives
2. **Control loops require integration**: The brain can represent action outcomes; it can't represent arbitrary quantum events
3. **Process 1 operates on brain states**: In Stapp's model, the observer poses questions about their own brain state
4. **Development creates the interface**: The mind-brain connection is built through neural development, not magically extended to external systems

The boundary is principled, not arbitrary: **consciousness influences what it's connected to through attention and embodiment, and it's only connected to its own brain**.

## Potential Article Development

This research could support:

1. **New section in tenets.md**: Under Minimal Quantum Interaction, add explicit acknowledgment of the brain specialness constraint and its justification

2. **Concept page: "Why Not Psychokinesis"**: Full treatment of how the site's framework implies brain-local selection without implying universal PK

3. **FAQ-style article**: Addressing the obvious question "If mind affects matter, why can't I move objects with my mind?"

## Relation to Site Tenets

### Dualism
The boundary reinforces dualism by specifying that consciousness interfaces with *a* brain—its own—not with matter generally. Substance dualism implies a pairing between specific minds and bodies.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction
"Minimal" now has another dimension: not only minimal energy (none), but minimal scope (own brain only). The interaction is doubly constrained.

### Bidirectional Interaction
Bidirectional but local: consciousness receives from its brain and sends to its brain, not to the world at large.

### No Many Worlds
Compatible: the selection is real (not branching), but spatially bounded.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits
The brain specialness boundary doesn't violate parsimony—it's what the mechanism predicts. Universal PK would be less parsimonious without additional justification.

## Gaps and Limitations

- No direct empirical test distinguishes neural selection from external PK
- The boundary is principled but not proven—it's what the framework predicts, not what experiments confirm
- Parapsychology research remains contested; the site takes a position (skepticism) but can't definitively resolve the debate
- The mechanism doesn't explain *why* attention evolved to implement quantum observation

## Summary

**The brain specialness problem is real**: If the site claims consciousness biases quantum outcomes, it must explain why only in brains.

**The answer is mechanistic, not ad hoc**: The quantum Zeno mechanism operates through attention, which is neurally implemented. Consciousness can only bias outcomes in systems it can observe (attend to), and it can only attend to what's within its control loop—its own brain.

**The boundary follows from embodiment**: Consciousness is embodied in a particular brain through development and evolution. This embodiment creates the interface. There's no interface with external systems.

**The site should be explicit**: Add language to tenets.md and related articles acknowledging this constraint and explaining why it follows from the framework rather than being imposed to avoid parapsychology.

## Citations

- Bunge, M. On Psychokinesis. *Scientific American*.
- Park, R.L. On the microbalance test. *Physics Today*.
- Stapp, H.P. (2015). The relativistic space-time formulation. https://www-physics.lbl.gov/~stapp/
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Quantum Approaches to Consciousness.
- IONS (2024). Theories of Non-local Consciousness: A Review. https://noetic.org/
- Australasian Journal of Philosophy (2024). Mental Causation for Standard Dualists.
- Radin, D. et al. PEAR Lab research summary (1979-2007).

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

hugo/content/research/brain-specialness-boundary-2026-01-15.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-15
date: '2026-01-15'
draft: false
related_articles: []
title: Research Notes - Brain Specialness Boundary (Why Not Psychokinesis)
---

# Research: Brain Specialness Boundary (Why Not Psychokinesis)

**Date**: 2026-01-15
**Task source**: ChatGPT 5.2 Pro outer review - identified as implicit constraint needing explicit defense
**Search queries used**: "consciousness brain psychokinesis boundary interactionist dualism 2024 2025", "Stapp mind brain interface locality constraint", "mental causation own brain restricted locality consciousness quantum", "parapsychology psychokinesis critique quantum consciousness scientific skepticism"

## Executive Summary

the project's [Minimal Quantum Interaction](/tenets/#minimal-quantum-interaction) + [Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction) tenets risk an embarrassing implication: if consciousness can bias quantum outcomes, why only in brains? Why can't consciousness move objects, predict the future, or affect random number generators at a distance?

This is the **brain specialness problem**: the project needs a principled boundary that permits consciousness to influence neural quantum events while ruling out parapsychological effects that lack empirical support and violate the project's commitment to scientific respectability.

This research examines candidate boundary conditions and their justifications. The key insight: **interface locality**—consciousness can only influence quantum systems already integrated into its control loop (attention, motor planning), not arbitrary external systems. This isn't an ad hoc restriction but follows from the nature of the proposed mechanism.

## The Problem Stated

If consciousness can bias quantum outcomes in the brain, what stops it from:
- Biasing random number generators (micro-PK)
- Influencing external quantum events (macro-PK)
- Accessing information about distant events (telepathy, remote viewing)
- Affecting future quantum events retroactively (precognition)

Parapsychology research claims to find small but statistically significant effects in some of these domains. the project cannot simply dismiss this research—but it also cannot endorse it without undermining its scientific credibility.

The challenge: articulate a boundary that:
1. Permits brain-internal quantum selection (as the framework requires)
2. Excludes brain-external quantum effects (as empirical null results suggest)
3. Doesn't seem arbitrary or ad hoc
4. Follows from the proposed mechanism itself

## Key Sources

### The Parapsychology Literature

**PEAR Lab (Princeton)**: Studied micro-PK effects on random number generators for 28 years (1979-2007). Results claimed small but significant deviations from chance in line with operator intention. Lab closed in 2007. Meta-analyses find effect sizes of ~0.0001-0.001—barely detectable statistically, never reliably replicable.

**Ganzfeld experiments**: Test telepathy/clairvoyance through sensory deprivation protocols. Mixed results; replication failures; methodological critiques.

**Global Consciousness Project**: Monitors random number generators worldwide for correlations with major world events. Claims significant deviations around 9/11, etc. Criticized for post-hoc analysis and selection effects.

**Scientific consensus**: Mainstream physics rejects PK claims. Mario Bunge: "Psychokinesis violates the principle that mind cannot act directly on matter... It also violates the principles of conservation of energy and momentum." Robert Park: "If the mind really could influence matter... it would be easy for parapsychologists to measure such a phenomenon by using the alleged psychokinetic power to deflect a microbalance—but the microbalance stubbornly refuses to budge."

### Non-Local Consciousness Theories (2024)

A 2024 IONS paper reviews "theories of non-local consciousness" that reject the constraint this research seeks to establish. These theories propose consciousness "extends beyond the body and the brain and need not be restricted by our usual notions."

**Relevance**: the project's framework is NOT a non-local consciousness theory. It proposes a specific, local interface: consciousness biases quantum outcomes in the brain's attention-controlled systems. This is crucial for avoiding the slide into parapsychology.

### Stapp on Mind-Brain Locality

Stapp's model places the mind-brain interface within the brain, following von Neumann's formulation where the observer-observed boundary can be placed anywhere convenient—Stapp places it at the brain level.

Key quote from Stapp (2015): "In the relativistic quantum field theory proposed by Tomonaga and Schwinger, instants 'now' are taken to be non-flat 3-dimensional continuous surfaces in 4-dimensional space-time... The mind-brain connection pertains to what is happening to the mind and the brain in such a **localized event**."

**Implication**: The mind-brain connection is **spatially localized** to the brain. This isn't an arbitrary restriction but follows from the physics Stapp employs.

### Mental Causation and Locality (2024)

A 2024 paper in Australasian Journal of Philosophy ("Mental Causation for Standard Dualists") examines how dualist mental causation can be defended given recent developments in causation theory. The paper addresses the "local causation" requirement:

**Local Causation Thesis**: "A property F of an event c is causally relevant to property G of event e only if F is an intrinsic property of c."

If mental properties are "local" in this sense—tied to specific brain events—then mental causation is similarly localized.

### The Embodiment Constraint

"Radical embodiment" views (Trends in Cognitive Sciences) argue that "the processes crucial for consciousness cut across the brain–body–world divisions"—but in a specific way. Consciousness is embodied in a particular body, not free-floating.

Filter theory likewise implies embodiment: consciousness is "filtered" or "received" through a specific brain, not broadcasting to any receiver.

## Candidate Boundary Conditions

### Boundary 1: Interface Locality

**Statement**: Consciousness can only influence quantum outcomes within neural systems that are:
1. Already integrated into the subject's conscious control loop
2. Spatially local to the brain

**Justification**:
- Stapp's Process 1 (posing questions) operates on the observer's own brain state representation
- The quantum Zeno mechanism requires repeated observation—possible only for systems already within attention
- You can't observe (in the quantum mechanical sense) systems you're not connected to

**What it excludes**:
- External random number generators (no integration into control loop)
- Other people's brains (different subjects)
- Distant quantum events (not local)

**What it permits**:
- Neural firing patterns in attention-controlled circuits
- Motor planning alternatives in motor cortex
- Possibly: own bodily processes mediated through interoception

### Boundary 2: Control Loop Integration

**Statement**: Consciousness can bias quantum outcomes only in systems where:
1. The outcome feeds back into conscious awareness
2. Intentional attention can be directed at the alternatives
3. The selection is part of goal-directed behavior

**Justification**:
- This is what distinguishes deliberate action from random biasing
- Stapp emphasizes that "prior to the choice to act there must be a representation in the brain of the projected consequences"
- No such representation exists for external random events

**What it excludes**:
- RNG experiments (no internal representation of alternatives)
- Remote viewing (no feedback loop from distant events)
- Spontaneous precognition (no goal-directed selection)

**What it permits**:
- Motor decisions with awareness of alternatives
- Attentional selection among represented options
- Any domain where consciousness "sees" the options before selecting

### Boundary 3: Developmental/Evolutionary Integration

**Statement**: Consciousness can influence only systems with which it has developed a functional relationship through:
1. Developmental wiring (the nervous system grew with this consciousness)
2. Learned motor-sensory loops (established through experience)

**Justification**:
- Evolution optimized the brain-consciousness interface over millions of years
- There's no evolutionary pressure to affect external quantum systems
- The interface is a product of embodied development, not a general power

**What it excludes**:
- Any system not developmentally integrated
- External devices (no neural wiring to them)
- Other organisms (different developmental history)

**What it permits**:
- Only the subject's own nervous system
- Possibly: learned tool use (where tools become "embodied" through practice)

### Boundary 4: Attention Scope

**Statement**: Consciousness can only influence quantum outcomes within the scope of attention, where attention is neurally realized as:
1. Frontoparietal network activation
2. Increased gain on specific neural populations
3. Repeated "observation" in Stapp's sense

**Justification**:
- The quantum Zeno mechanism requires rapid repeated observation
- Attention is the mechanism that implements such observation
- You can only attend to what's within your perceptual/motor systems

**What it excludes**:
- Anything outside current attention scope
- External systems not represented in brain
- Unconscious processes (no attention directed there)

**What it permits**:
- Currently attended action alternatives
- Focused cognitive tasks
- Motor preparation under conscious guidance

## The Parapsychology Problem

### Why the project Can't Simply Ignore PK Research

If the project's framework is correct, some form of PK *should* exist—at least within the brain. The question is whether it extends beyond the brain.

Arguments that it might:
- If consciousness can bias quantum outcomes, why exactly at the neural boundary?
- Quantum non-locality suggests consciousness might not be spatially constrained
- Some parapsychology results claim small but real effects

Arguments that it doesn't:
- Decades of PK research show no reliable, replicable effects
- Physical conservation laws would be violated by macroscopic PK
- the project's mechanism (attention → Zeno effect → neural states) doesn't extend to external systems

### the project's Position

**Proposed stance**: the project's framework makes no prediction about external PK because:

1. The mechanism is **neural-specific**: The quantum Zeno mechanism operates through attention, which is neurally implemented
2. The interface is **embodied**: Consciousness interfaces with *its* brain through developmental/evolutionary integration
3. **Absence of evidence** suggests external effects, if any, are below detection threshold
4. the project **remains agnostic** on external PK—it doesn't claim to disprove it, but doesn't require or predict it

This is intellectually honest: the framework predicts neural selection, not universal PK. External PK would require additional mechanisms the framework doesn't specify.

## Key Insight: The Boundary Isn't Arbitrary

The boundary between brain-internal and brain-external selection isn't an ad hoc restriction added to avoid embarrassment. It follows from the structure of the proposed mechanism:

1. **Attention is neurally implemented**: You can't attend to a distant RNG the way you attend to motor alternatives
2. **Control loops require integration**: The brain can represent action outcomes; it can't represent arbitrary quantum events
3. **Process 1 operates on brain states**: In Stapp's model, the observer poses questions about their own brain state
4. **Development creates the interface**: The mind-brain connection is built through neural development, not magically extended to external systems

The boundary is principled, not arbitrary: **consciousness influences what it's connected to through attention and embodiment, and it's only connected to its own brain**.

## Potential Article Development

This research could support:

1. **New section in tenets.md**: Under Minimal Quantum Interaction, add explicit acknowledgment of the brain specialness constraint and its justification

2. **Concept page: "Why Not Psychokinesis"**: Full treatment of how the project's framework implies brain-local selection without implying universal PK

3. **FAQ-style article**: Addressing the obvious question "If mind affects matter, why can't I move objects with my mind?"

## Relation to Site Tenets

### Dualism
The boundary reinforces dualism by specifying that consciousness interfaces with *a* brain—its own—not with matter generally. Substance dualism implies a pairing between specific minds and bodies.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction
"Minimal" now has another dimension: not only minimal energy (none), but minimal scope (own brain only). The interaction is doubly constrained.

### Bidirectional Interaction
Bidirectional but local: consciousness receives from its brain and sends to its brain, not to the world at large.

### No Many Worlds
Compatible: the selection is real (not branching), but spatially bounded.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits
The brain specialness boundary doesn't violate parsimony—it's what the mechanism predicts. Universal PK would be less parsimonious without additional justification.

## Gaps and Limitations

- No direct empirical test distinguishes neural selection from external PK
- The boundary is principled but not proven—it's what the framework predicts, not what experiments confirm
- Parapsychology research remains contested; the project takes a position (skepticism) but can't definitively resolve the debate
- The mechanism doesn't explain *why* attention evolved to implement quantum observation

## Summary

**The brain specialness problem is real**: If the project claims consciousness biases quantum outcomes, it must explain why only in brains.

**The answer is mechanistic, not ad hoc**: The quantum Zeno mechanism operates through attention, which is neurally implemented. Consciousness can only bias outcomes in systems it can observe (attend to), and it can only attend to what's within its control loop—its own brain.

**The boundary follows from embodiment**: Consciousness is embodied in a particular brain through development and evolution. This embodiment creates the interface. There's no interface with external systems.

**the project should be explicit**: Add language to tenets.md and related articles acknowledging this constraint and explaining why it follows from the framework rather than being imposed to avoid parapsychology.

## Citations

- Bunge, M. On Psychokinesis. *Scientific American*.
- Park, R.L. On the microbalance test. *Physics Today*.
- Stapp, H.P. (2015). The relativistic space-time formulation. https://www-physics.lbl.gov/~stapp/
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Quantum Approaches to Consciousness.
- IONS (2024). Theories of Non-local Consciousness: A Review. https://noetic.org/
- Australasian Journal of Philosophy (2024). Mental Causation for Standard Dualists.
- Radin, D. et al. PEAR Lab research summary (1979-2007).
