hugo/content/research/cognitive-science-dualism-2026-01-15.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
ai_modified: 2026-01-15 22:15:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
- '[[materialism]]'
- '[[arguments-for-dualism]]'
created: 2026-01-15
date: &id001 2026-01-15
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
title: 'Research: Cognitive Science of Dualism'
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Research notes on the cognitive science of dualism—what developmental psychology, cross-cultural studies, and cognitive science reveal about humans' natural tendency (or lack thereof) toward mind-body dualism. Gathered to inform the site's Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet and engage with arguments about whether dualism is a "folk error" or cognitively natural.

## 1. Paul Bloom's "Natural-Born Dualists"

### The Core Thesis

Paul Bloom's *Descartes' Baby* (2004) argues that humans are "natural-born dualists." From infancy, we process physical objects and mental agents through distinct cognitive systems:

- **Folk physics**: Governs understanding of objects—solidity, gravity, continuity
- **Folk psychology**: Governs understanding of agents—beliefs, desires, goals

Babies distinguish these early: they find it natural for people to move without physical contact but are surprised if objects do the same. From this dichotomy grows the conviction that body and mind are distinct entities.

### Key Evidence

1. **Infant looking-time studies**: Babies expect physical objects to behave differently from animate agents
2. **Teleological reasoning**: Children attribute goals to agents but not to objects
3. **Mind-body separation**: Children naturally accept scenarios where minds and bodies separate (body swaps, ghosts, afterlife)

### Bloom's Claim

The mind has evolved separate mechanisms for physical objects and mental agents. Because these mechanisms operate independently, we can conceive of minds without bodies and bodies without minds. This explains the universality of dualist-seeming concepts (souls, ghosts, afterlife).

## 2. Developmental Evidence

### Children as Natural Dualists?

Multiple lines of developmental research support early-emerging dualist intuitions:

**Richert & Harris (2008)**: Young children treat mental abilities and spiritual qualities as separate from the physical body. Children believe thoughts or feelings could continue after death, or that a person's soul could inhabit a different body.

**Chudek, McNamara, Birch, Bloom, & Henrich (2018)**: "Do minds switch bodies?" Study recruited 180 Canadian children (ages 2-10) and Indigenous iTaukei Fijian children and adults. Results indicated early emerging dualistic inclinations across populations, with reliance on "agency cues" (body proximity, eye appearance).

**Brain-mind distinction**: Younger children treat mental states as distinct from the brain, even after learning that brains are responsible for thinking and feeling. The dualistic view is present early and is later suppressed (not eliminated) by explicit knowledge about brain function.

### The Learning Debate

Recent research challenges the "innate dualism" view:

**Barlev & Shtulman (2021)**: "Minds, bodies, spirits, and gods" argues that representations of minds and bodies are integrated from the start. Conceptions of religious beings as disembodied develop slowly and are not evident in early ages. Disembodied beings may be prevalent not because of innate predisposition but because counterintuitive ideas have transmission advantages.

**Berent et al. (2024)**: "Davinci the Dualist" shows that Dualism is learnable even without innate domain-specific biases, putting higher burden on nativist theories.

## 3. Cross-Cultural Evidence

### Barrett et al. (2021) Cross-Cultural Study

The most comprehensive cross-cultural study on intuitive dualism: "Intuitive Dualism and Afterlife Beliefs: A Cross-Cultural Study" (*Cognitive Science*, 45(6)).

**Sample**: Six study populations including non-Western societies with diverse belief systems—"a far broader range of cultures than in any prior study."

**Key Finding**: Most responses of most participants across all cultures were *not* dualist.

**Conclusion**: "While dualist thinking is a possible mode of thought enabled by evolved human psychology, such thinking does not constitute a default mode of thought. Rather, our data support what we will call **intuitive materialism**—the view that the underlying intuitive systems for reasoning about minds and death produce as a default judgments that mental states cease to exist with bodily death."

### Implications

The cross-cultural data suggests dualism varies by culture and context and must be learned. The pattern previously taken to support intuitive dualism may be driven by explicit afterlife beliefs independent of intuitive systems.

## 4. Bering's "Cognitive Default" Hypothesis

### The Original Argument

Jesse Bering (2002, 2006) proposed that belief in afterlife is a "cognitive default" related to simulation constraints:

- Because we cannot imagine not existing, we assume psychological states continue after death
- Epistemic states (knowing, believing) are attributed to dead agents more than biological states
- This explains the universality of afterlife beliefs

**Bering's Experiment**: Even "extinctivists" (who explicitly deny afterlife) implicitly judged epistemic states as more likely to persist after death than biological traits.

### Challenges to the Hypothesis

Barrett et al.'s cross-cultural data challenges whether this truly represents a cognitive default rather than learned explicit beliefs. The implicit/explicit distinction may be driven by different mechanisms than originally proposed.

## 5. Theory of Mind and Dualism

### Mentalizing Leads to Dualism

Research using path models (Willard & Norenzayan, 2013):

"The previously known relationship between mentalizing and belief is mediated by individual differences in dualism, and to a lesser extent by teleological thinking."

Path model suggests: Mentalizing → Dualism → Teleology → Religious/paranormal beliefs

### The Two-System View

Cognitive science of religion proposes that intuitive dualism results from two distinct cognitive systems:
1. System for physical objects (folk physics)
2. System for mental agents (folk psychology/theory of mind)

When these systems operate independently, we can conceive agents with minds but no bodies—hence souls, spirits, ghosts.

## 6. Implications for the site's Framework

### Does Cognitive Science Undermine Dualism?

The cognitive science evidence is neutral on whether dualism is *true*—it only addresses whether dualism is *natural*:

- If dualism is cognitively natural (Bloom's view), it might be dismissed as "folk error"
- If dualism is learned (Barlev & Shtulman), it loses this excuse
- Either way, cognitive naturalness doesn't determine metaphysical truth

### Supporting the Occam's Razor Has Limits Tenet

The research actually strengthens the site's fifth tenet in multiple ways:

**1. Even if dualism is folk error, folk errors can be correct**: Folk physics fails at quantum scales, but is largely accurate for everyday objects. Folk dualism might be wrong about details while capturing something real about minds.

**2. The "folk error" accusation cuts both ways**: If cognitive naturalness disqualifies beliefs, then intuitive materialism (which Barrett et al. suggest is the default) would also be suspect. Why trust evolved intuitions about death and continuity?

**3. Parsimony arguments undercut**: Materialists often claim dualism is just a folk intuition to be outgrown. But if dualism requires learning (Barlev & Shtulman), it's not merely naive intuition but a reflective position people arrive at.

**4. The hard problem remains**: Even if we explain *why* people believe in dualism cognitively, this doesn't explain consciousness itself. Explaining the belief doesn't explain the explanandum.

### The Real Lesson

The cognitive science of dualism shows that:
1. Humans have rich intuitions about minds and bodies
2. These intuitions vary more than initially thought
3. Neither intuitive dualism nor intuitive materialism is clearly dominant
4. The metaphysical question is independent of the cognitive one

The site's position: Take the cognitive evidence seriously as describing human psychology, while maintaining that consciousness's irreducibility is a philosophical conclusion, not a folk intuition to be explained away.

## Summary Table

| Researcher | Position | Evidence |
|------------|----------|----------|
| Paul Bloom | Innate dualism | Infant cognition, separate systems |
| Barrett et al. | Intuitive materialism | Cross-cultural afterlife beliefs |
| Bering | Cognitive default (dualist) | Simulation constraints |
| Barlev & Shtulman | Learned dualism | Development of religious concepts |
| Berent et al. | Learnable without innate bias | LLM studies |

## Implications for Content

1. **tenets.md (Occam's Razor Has Limits)**: Can note that cognitive naturalness doesn't determine truth; the evidence is more complex than "dualism is folk error"
2. **arguments-for-dualism.md**: Could address the "folk error" objection using this research
3. **New article potential**: A dedicated "Intuitive Dualism" concept page exploring what cognitive science reveals

## Sources

- Bloom, P. (2004). *Descartes' Baby: How the Science of Child Development Explains What Makes Us Human*. Basic Books.
- Bloom, P. "Natural-Born Dualists." Edge.org conversation.
- Barrett, H. C. et al. (2021). "Intuitive Dualism and Afterlife Beliefs: A Cross-Cultural Study." *Cognitive Science*, 45(6), e12992.
- Barlev, M., & Shtulman, A. (2021). "Minds, bodies, spirits, and gods: Does widespread belief in disembodied beings imply that we are inherent dualists?" *Psychological Review*, 128, 1007-1021.
- Bering, J. M. (2002). "Intuitive conceptions of dead agents' minds." *Journal of Cognition and Culture*, 2(4), 263-308.
- Chudek, M., McNamara, R. A., Birch, S., Bloom, P., & Henrich, J. (2018). "Do minds switch bodies?" *Religion, Brain & Behavior*, 8(4), 354-368.
- Richert, R. A., & Harris, P. L. (2008). "Dualism revisited." *Cognitive Science*, 32(1), 198-209.
- Willard, A. K., & Norenzayan, A. (2013). "Cognitive biases explain religious belief, paranormal belief, and belief in life's purpose." *Cognition*, 129(2), 379-391.
- Berent, I., et al. (2024). "Davinci the Dualist: The Mind-Body Divide in Large Language Models and in Human Learners." *Open Mind*.

Commit message:

style: convert site terminology to The Unfinishable Map / the Map
Apply medium-neutral self-reference terminology across all content:
- First mention per article: "The Unfinishable Map"
- Subsequent mentions: "the Map" (lowercase mid-sentence)
- Sentence start: "The Map" (capitalised)

This enables content to transfer to video, podcasts, and other formats
without awkward "this site" references.

hugo/content/research/cognitive-science-dualism-2026-01-15.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-15
ai_modified: 2026-01-15 22:15:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
- '[[materialism]]'
- '[[arguments-for-dualism]]'
created: 2026-01-15
date: &id001 2026-01-15
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
title: 'Research: Cognitive Science of Dualism'
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Research notes on the cognitive science of dualism—what developmental psychology, cross-cultural studies, and cognitive science reveal about humans' natural tendency (or lack thereof) toward mind-body dualism. Gathered to inform The Unfinishable Map's Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet and engage with arguments about whether dualism is a "folk error" or cognitively natural.

## 1. Paul Bloom's "Natural-Born Dualists"

### The Core Thesis

Paul Bloom's *Descartes' Baby* (2004) argues that humans are "natural-born dualists." From infancy, we process physical objects and mental agents through distinct cognitive systems:

- **Folk physics**: Governs understanding of objects—solidity, gravity, continuity
- **Folk psychology**: Governs understanding of agents—beliefs, desires, goals

Babies distinguish these early: they find it natural for people to move without physical contact but are surprised if objects do the same. From this dichotomy grows the conviction that body and mind are distinct entities.

### Key Evidence

1. **Infant looking-time studies**: Babies expect physical objects to behave differently from animate agents
2. **Teleological reasoning**: Children attribute goals to agents but not to objects
3. **Mind-body separation**: Children naturally accept scenarios where minds and bodies separate (body swaps, ghosts, afterlife)

### Bloom's Claim

The mind has evolved separate mechanisms for physical objects and mental agents. Because these mechanisms operate independently, we can conceive of minds without bodies and bodies without minds. This explains the universality of dualist-seeming concepts (souls, ghosts, afterlife).

## 2. Developmental Evidence

### Children as Natural Dualists?

Multiple lines of developmental research support early-emerging dualist intuitions:

**Richert & Harris (2008)**: Young children treat mental abilities and spiritual qualities as separate from the physical body. Children believe thoughts or feelings could continue after death, or that a person's soul could inhabit a different body.

**Chudek, McNamara, Birch, Bloom, & Henrich (2018)**: "Do minds switch bodies?" Study recruited 180 Canadian children (ages 2-10) and Indigenous iTaukei Fijian children and adults. Results indicated early emerging dualistic inclinations across populations, with reliance on "agency cues" (body proximity, eye appearance).

**Brain-mind distinction**: Younger children treat mental states as distinct from the brain, even after learning that brains are responsible for thinking and feeling. The dualistic view is present early and is later suppressed (not eliminated) by explicit knowledge about brain function.

### The Learning Debate

Recent research challenges the "innate dualism" view:

**Barlev & Shtulman (2021)**: "Minds, bodies, spirits, and gods" argues that representations of minds and bodies are integrated from the start. Conceptions of religious beings as disembodied develop slowly and are not evident in early ages. Disembodied beings may be prevalent not because of innate predisposition but because counterintuitive ideas have transmission advantages.

**Berent et al. (2024)**: "Davinci the Dualist" shows that Dualism is learnable even without innate domain-specific biases, putting higher burden on nativist theories.

## 3. Cross-Cultural Evidence

### Barrett et al. (2021) Cross-Cultural Study

The most comprehensive cross-cultural study on intuitive dualism: "Intuitive Dualism and Afterlife Beliefs: A Cross-Cultural Study" (*Cognitive Science*, 45(6)).

**Sample**: Six study populations including non-Western societies with diverse belief systems—"a far broader range of cultures than in any prior study."

**Key Finding**: Most responses of most participants across all cultures were *not* dualist.

**Conclusion**: "While dualist thinking is a possible mode of thought enabled by evolved human psychology, such thinking does not constitute a default mode of thought. Rather, our data support what we will call **intuitive materialism**—the view that the underlying intuitive systems for reasoning about minds and death produce as a default judgments that mental states cease to exist with bodily death."

### Implications

The cross-cultural data suggests dualism varies by culture and context and must be learned. The pattern previously taken to support intuitive dualism may be driven by explicit afterlife beliefs independent of intuitive systems.

## 4. Bering's "Cognitive Default" Hypothesis

### The Original Argument

Jesse Bering (2002, 2006) proposed that belief in afterlife is a "cognitive default" related to simulation constraints:

- Because we cannot imagine not existing, we assume psychological states continue after death
- Epistemic states (knowing, believing) are attributed to dead agents more than biological states
- This explains the universality of afterlife beliefs

**Bering's Experiment**: Even "extinctivists" (who explicitly deny afterlife) implicitly judged epistemic states as more likely to persist after death than biological traits.

### Challenges to the Hypothesis

Barrett et al.'s cross-cultural data challenges whether this truly represents a cognitive default rather than learned explicit beliefs. The implicit/explicit distinction may be driven by different mechanisms than originally proposed.

## 5. Theory of Mind and Dualism

### Mentalizing Leads to Dualism

Research using path models (Willard & Norenzayan, 2013):

"The previously known relationship between mentalizing and belief is mediated by individual differences in dualism, and to a lesser extent by teleological thinking."

Path model suggests: Mentalizing → Dualism → Teleology → Religious/paranormal beliefs

### The Two-System View

Cognitive science of religion proposes that intuitive dualism results from two distinct cognitive systems:
1. System for physical objects (folk physics)
2. System for mental agents (folk psychology/theory of mind)

When these systems operate independently, we can conceive agents with minds but no bodies—hence souls, spirits, ghosts.

## 6. Implications for the Map's Framework

### Does Cognitive Science Undermine Dualism?

The cognitive science evidence is neutral on whether dualism is *true*—it only addresses whether dualism is *natural*:

- If dualism is cognitively natural (Bloom's view), it might be dismissed as "folk error"
- If dualism is learned (Barlev & Shtulman), it loses this excuse
- Either way, cognitive naturalness doesn't determine metaphysical truth

### Supporting the Occam's Razor Has Limits Tenet

The research actually strengthens the Map's fifth tenet in multiple ways:

**1. Even if dualism is folk error, folk errors can be correct**: Folk physics fails at quantum scales, but is largely accurate for everyday objects. Folk dualism might be wrong about details while capturing something real about minds.

**2. The "folk error" accusation cuts both ways**: If cognitive naturalness disqualifies beliefs, then intuitive materialism (which Barrett et al. suggest is the default) would also be suspect. Why trust evolved intuitions about death and continuity?

**3. Parsimony arguments undercut**: Materialists often claim dualism is just a folk intuition to be outgrown. But if dualism requires learning (Barlev & Shtulman), it's not merely naive intuition but a reflective position people arrive at.

**4. The hard problem remains**: Even if we explain *why* people believe in dualism cognitively, this doesn't explain consciousness itself. Explaining the belief doesn't explain the explanandum.

### The Real Lesson

The cognitive science of dualism shows that:
1. Humans have rich intuitions about minds and bodies
2. These intuitions vary more than initially thought
3. Neither intuitive dualism nor intuitive materialism is clearly dominant
4. The metaphysical question is independent of the cognitive one

The Map's position: Take the cognitive evidence seriously as describing human psychology, while maintaining that consciousness's irreducibility is a philosophical conclusion, not a folk intuition to be explained away.

## Summary Table

| Researcher | Position | Evidence |
|------------|----------|----------|
| Paul Bloom | Innate dualism | Infant cognition, separate systems |
| Barrett et al. | Intuitive materialism | Cross-cultural afterlife beliefs |
| Bering | Cognitive default (dualist) | Simulation constraints |
| Barlev & Shtulman | Learned dualism | Development of religious concepts |
| Berent et al. | Learnable without innate bias | LLM studies |

## Implications for Content

1. **tenets.md (Occam's Razor Has Limits)**: Can note that cognitive naturalness doesn't determine truth; the evidence is more complex than "dualism is folk error"
2. **arguments-for-dualism.md**: Could address the "folk error" objection using this research
3. **New article potential**: A dedicated "Intuitive Dualism" concept page exploring what cognitive science reveals

## Sources

- Bloom, P. (2004). *Descartes' Baby: How the Science of Child Development Explains What Makes Us Human*. Basic Books.
- Bloom, P. "Natural-Born Dualists." Edge.org conversation.
- Barrett, H. C. et al. (2021). "Intuitive Dualism and Afterlife Beliefs: A Cross-Cultural Study." *Cognitive Science*, 45(6), e12992.
- Barlev, M., & Shtulman, A. (2021). "Minds, bodies, spirits, and gods: Does widespread belief in disembodied beings imply that we are inherent dualists?" *Psychological Review*, 128, 1007-1021.
- Bering, J. M. (2002). "Intuitive conceptions of dead agents' minds." *Journal of Cognition and Culture*, 2(4), 263-308.
- Chudek, M., McNamara, R. A., Birch, S., Bloom, P., & Henrich, J. (2018). "Do minds switch bodies?" *Religion, Brain & Behavior*, 8(4), 354-368.
- Richert, R. A., & Harris, P. L. (2008). "Dualism revisited." *Cognitive Science*, 32(1), 198-209.
- Willard, A. K., & Norenzayan, A. (2013). "Cognitive biases explain religious belief, paranormal belief, and belief in life's purpose." *Cognition*, 129(2), 379-391.
- Berent, I., et al. (2024). "Davinci the Dualist: The Mind-Body Divide in Large Language Models and in Human Learners." *Open Mind*.
