hugo/content/research/consciousness-working-memory-2026-01-17.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-17
ai_modified: 2026-01-17 19:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[attention]]'
- '[[attention-as-interface]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[specious-present]]'
- '[[global-workspace-theory]]'
created: 2026-01-17
date: &id001 2026-01-17
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
title: 'Research: Consciousness and Working Memory'
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Research notes on the relationship between consciousness and working memory, with focus on temporal consciousness, attention mechanisms, and the site's interface framework.

## Overview

Working memory (WM) has traditionally been viewed as closely coupled with consciousness—WM operates on conscious input, and we are conscious of WM contents. However, recent research complicates this picture, showing that unconscious information can be maintained in WM and that WM mechanisms may operate without conscious awareness. This research is relevant to the site's attention-as-interface hypothesis and temporal consciousness framework.

## Key Concepts

### Baddeley's Working Memory Model

The dominant model (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; updated through 2025) proposes:

1. **Central executive**: Attentional control system that determines what information gains access to consciousness
2. **Phonological loop**: Maintains verbal/acoustic information
3. **Visuospatial sketchpad**: Maintains visual and spatial information
4. **Episodic buffer** (added 2000): Limited-capacity store for integrated multimodal representations, "accessed by conscious awareness"

The episodic buffer is particularly relevant—Baddeley assumes retrieval from the buffer occurs through conscious awareness. The buffer is "capable of storing bound features and making them available to conscious awareness but not itself responsible for the process of binding."

**Relevance to site**: The binding question in WM mirrors the binding problem in consciousness. If the episodic buffer binds features and makes them available to consciousness, what does the binding? the site's proposal: consciousness participates in binding constitutively.

### Working Memory and the Specious Present

Research identifies multiple temporal orders in perception:

1. **Functional moment** (<100ms): Basic building block where perception is instantaneous; events processed as co-temporal
2. **Experienced moment** (100ms–5s): Temporal integration creating windows for conscious representation and "nowness"
3. **Estimation** (>5s): Duration estimates involving memory

The 100ms–5s window corresponds to both the specious present and WM maintenance capacity. This isn't coincidental—WM may provide the temporal bridge that creates the experience of an extended present.

"Working memory provides a temporal bridge between events—both those that are internally generated and environmentally presented—thereby conferring a sense of unity and continuity to conscious experience."

**Relevance to site**: The specious present may be phenomenology of WM at work. the site's specious-present article proposes modified extensionalism—consciousness extends over duration-blocks constituted by collapse. WM maintenance could be the neural correlate of this extended phenomenal present.

## Working Memory and Global Workspace Theory

GWT proposes that WM and consciousness share mechanisms:

1. **Global workspace = WM**: "The global workspace is a form of working memory"
2. **Broadcasting mechanism**: Information in WM is broadcast to specialized processors across the brain
3. **Conscious access**: WM operates by selecting information and broadcasting it at global brain scale

The prefrontal-parietal network plays a hub role in broadcasting. The 2025 COGITATE results showing posterior cortex (not prefrontal) tracking conscious content may complicate this—consciousness content resides posteriorly while WM control/broadcasting operates frontally.

**Relevance to site**: The attention-as-interface hypothesis proposes attention mediates consciousness-to-matter causation. WM and attention are deeply interlinked—content of WM can direct attention, and attention determines what enters WM. If attention is the interface, WM may be consciousness's "holding space" for the information attention can act upon.

## The Unconscious Working Memory Debate

### Evidence for Unconscious WM

Soto, Mäntylä & Silvanto (2011) challenged the view that WM requires consciousness:
- Observers encoded subliminal orientation cues
- Maintained them "on-line" even with visible distractors
- Performed above chance in subsequent discrimination

This suggests WM processes are not contingent on conscious awareness.

### Activity-Silent Maintenance

Traditional theory: WM maintenance requires sustained neuronal activity
New evidence: Information can be maintained in "activity-silent" states via:
- Short-term synaptic plasticity
- Residual calcium at synaptic terminals
- Rapid changes in synaptic weights

The synaptic calcium kinetics has ~1 second time constant—enabling activity-silent traces spanning the WM delay period without sustained firing.

**Key finding**: "Non-conscious, activity-silent maintenance is a genuine phenomenon but should be termed 'activity-silent short-term memory'; when using a memory, a reactivation, associated with conscious reportability, is necessary."

This suggests:
1. Storage can be unconscious
2. *Use* requires conscious reactivation
3. Consciousness may be necessary for the executive manipulation of WM contents even if maintenance doesn't require it

**Relevance to site**: The distinction between maintenance (possibly unconscious) and manipulation (requiring consciousness) maps onto the site's framework. Passive storage might be purely neural; active selection and manipulation might require consciousness's participation. The attention-as-interface hypothesis implies consciousness acts through attention on neural patterns—WM manipulation could be this interface in action.

## Prefrontal Cortex and Executive Functions

Research on PFC role in WM:

1. **Delay period activity**: PFC shows sustained activity during WM delay, specific to stimulus being remembered
2. **Task relevance**: PFC only encodes task-relevant information—resistant to distractors
3. **Executive functions**: PFC circuitry is critical to executive-attention functions (shifting, updating, inhibition)

However, recent findings question whether the central executive is as "central" as Baddeley proposed. There may be multiple separable executive functions that can vary independently and be selectively impaired.

**Relevance to site**: The 2025 COGITATE results found conscious perception tracked by posterior cortex, not prefrontal. This suggests PFC executive functions (including WM manipulation) are distinct from conscious content. The interface may be where these systems meet—PFC executes control while posterior regions hold conscious content.

## Connection to Autonoetic Consciousness

Tulving (2002) proposed that manipulating episodic memories creates autonoetic consciousness—awareness of subjective time through past recall and future imagination.

This connects WM to temporal self-consciousness:
- WM provides temporal bridge
- Episodic buffer enables multimodal binding
- Autonoetic consciousness enables mental time travel

The site's autonoetic-consciousness article notes hippocampal binding operates for both episodic memory and scene perception. WM may be the active workspace where bound episodic content becomes available for manipulation and mental time travel.

## Implications for Site Framework

### Attention-as-Interface

The WM–attention link strengthens the interface hypothesis:
- Attention determines what enters WM
- WM contents guide attention
- This bidirectional relationship is where consciousness may exert influence
- The ~10 bits/second bandwidth constraint noted in the site's coupling law research matches WM capacity limitations

### Temporal Consciousness

WM may underlie the specious present:
- The 100ms–5s experienced moment corresponds to WM capacity
- Husserlian retention-protention structure maps onto WM's brief backward and forward reach
- The phenomenal "now" may be WM at work

### The Binding Connection

WM binding (episodic buffer) and perceptual binding may share mechanisms:
- Both integrate multimodal information
- Both make bound representations available to consciousness
- The hippocampus participates in both
- Quantum binding hypothesis could apply to both

### Consciousness as Executive Function?

Miller (neuroscientist) claims: "Working memory is what we use when we think. It is the contents of consciousness, not just the thoughts but what we do with them."

But the site would qualify this: WM contents correlate with consciousness, but WM manipulation may be how consciousness acts on neural content rather than being consciousness itself. The distinction between having conscious content and manipulating conscious content matters.

## Research Questions for Site

1. **Does mental effort in WM manipulation differ from attention alone?** the site links mental effort to consciousness's causal influence. WM manipulation feels effortful—is this the phenomenology of the interface at work?

2. **What happens to WM in altered states?** Meditation, psychedelics, anesthesia all alter both WM and consciousness. Filter theory would predict dissociations—WM capacity might remain while conscious access changes.

3. **How does WM relate to quantum timescales?** WM operates over seconds; quantum effects at nanoseconds. How does the site's minimal quantum interaction scale up to WM timescales? The activity-silent hypothesis (synaptic calcium ~1s) may be relevant—what happens at the synaptic level during WM maintenance?

4. **Is there WM in dreams?** Dream phenomenology includes experienced duration but limited executive function. How does this bear on the WM–consciousness relationship?

## Candidate Article Topics

Based on this research, potential article topics:

1. **Concept page: Working Memory** — Core WM models, relationship to consciousness, executive functions, temporal bridge function

2. **Cross-review attention.md**: Add explicit WM connection—the attention-WM bidirectional relationship strengthens the interface hypothesis

3. **Cross-review specious-present.md**: Add WM as neural correlate of experienced duration

4. **Cross-review mental-effort.md**: WM manipulation as effortful attention in action

## Sources

- Baddeley, A. & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. Psychology of Learning and Motivation.
- Soto, D., Mäntylä, T., & Silvanto, J. (2011). Working memory without consciousness. Current Biology.
- Baars, B. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness.
- Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain. Annual Review of Psychology.
- Hitch, G.J., Allen, R.J., & Baddeley, A.D. (2025). The multicomponent model of working memory fifty years on. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
- Pöppel, E. (1997). A hierarchical model of temporal perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
- Stokes, M.G. (2015). 'Activity-silent' working memory in prefrontal cortex: a dynamic coding framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.

Commit message:

style: convert site terminology to The Unfinishable Map / the Map
Apply medium-neutral self-reference terminology across all content:
- First mention per article: "The Unfinishable Map"
- Subsequent mentions: "the Map" (lowercase mid-sentence)
- Sentence start: "The Map" (capitalised)

This enables content to transfer to video, podcasts, and other formats
without awkward "this site" references.

hugo/content/research/consciousness-working-memory-2026-01-17.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-17
ai_modified: 2026-01-17 19:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[attention]]'
- '[[attention-as-interface]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[specious-present]]'
- '[[global-workspace-theory]]'
created: 2026-01-17
date: &id001 2026-01-17
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
title: 'Research: Consciousness and Working Memory'
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
---

Research notes on the relationship between consciousness and working memory, with focus on temporal consciousness, attention mechanisms, and The Unfinishable Map's interface framework.

## Overview

Working memory (WM) has traditionally been viewed as closely coupled with consciousness—WM operates on conscious input, and we are conscious of WM contents. However, recent research complicates this picture, showing that unconscious information can be maintained in WM and that WM mechanisms may operate without conscious awareness. This research is relevant to the Map's attention-as-interface hypothesis and temporal consciousness framework.

## Key Concepts

### Baddeley's Working Memory Model

The dominant model (Baddeley & Hitch, 1974; updated through 2025) proposes:

1. **Central executive**: Attentional control system that determines what information gains access to consciousness
2. **Phonological loop**: Maintains verbal/acoustic information
3. **Visuospatial sketchpad**: Maintains visual and spatial information
4. **Episodic buffer** (added 2000): Limited-capacity store for integrated multimodal representations, "accessed by conscious awareness"

The episodic buffer is particularly relevant—Baddeley assumes retrieval from the buffer occurs through conscious awareness. The buffer is "capable of storing bound features and making them available to conscious awareness but not itself responsible for the process of binding."

**Relevance to site**: The binding question in WM mirrors the binding problem in consciousness. If the episodic buffer binds features and makes them available to consciousness, what does the binding? the Map's proposal: consciousness participates in binding constitutively.

### Working Memory and the Specious Present

Research identifies multiple temporal orders in perception:

1. **Functional moment** (<100ms): Basic building block where perception is instantaneous; events processed as co-temporal
2. **Experienced moment** (100ms–5s): Temporal integration creating windows for conscious representation and "nowness"
3. **Estimation** (>5s): Duration estimates involving memory

The 100ms–5s window corresponds to both the specious present and WM maintenance capacity. This isn't coincidental—WM may provide the temporal bridge that creates the experience of an extended present.

"Working memory provides a temporal bridge between events—both those that are internally generated and environmentally presented—thereby conferring a sense of unity and continuity to conscious experience."

**Relevance to site**: The specious present may be phenomenology of WM at work. the Map's specious-present article proposes modified extensionalism—consciousness extends over duration-blocks constituted by collapse. WM maintenance could be the neural correlate of this extended phenomenal present.

## Working Memory and Global Workspace Theory

GWT proposes that WM and consciousness share mechanisms:

1. **Global workspace = WM**: "The global workspace is a form of working memory"
2. **Broadcasting mechanism**: Information in WM is broadcast to specialized processors across the brain
3. **Conscious access**: WM operates by selecting information and broadcasting it at global brain scale

The prefrontal-parietal network plays a hub role in broadcasting. The 2025 COGITATE results showing posterior cortex (not prefrontal) tracking conscious content may complicate this—consciousness content resides posteriorly while WM control/broadcasting operates frontally.

**Relevance to site**: The attention-as-interface hypothesis proposes attention mediates consciousness-to-matter causation. WM and attention are deeply interlinked—content of WM can direct attention, and attention determines what enters WM. If attention is the interface, WM may be consciousness's "holding space" for the information attention can act upon.

## The Unconscious Working Memory Debate

### Evidence for Unconscious WM

Soto, Mäntylä & Silvanto (2011) challenged the view that WM requires consciousness:
- Observers encoded subliminal orientation cues
- Maintained them "on-line" even with visible distractors
- Performed above chance in subsequent discrimination

This suggests WM processes are not contingent on conscious awareness.

### Activity-Silent Maintenance

Traditional theory: WM maintenance requires sustained neuronal activity
New evidence: Information can be maintained in "activity-silent" states via:
- Short-term synaptic plasticity
- Residual calcium at synaptic terminals
- Rapid changes in synaptic weights

The synaptic calcium kinetics has ~1 second time constant—enabling activity-silent traces spanning the WM delay period without sustained firing.

**Key finding**: "Non-conscious, activity-silent maintenance is a genuine phenomenon but should be termed 'activity-silent short-term memory'; when using a memory, a reactivation, associated with conscious reportability, is necessary."

This suggests:
1. Storage can be unconscious
2. *Use* requires conscious reactivation
3. Consciousness may be necessary for the executive manipulation of WM contents even if maintenance doesn't require it

**Relevance to site**: The distinction between maintenance (possibly unconscious) and manipulation (requiring consciousness) maps onto the Map's framework. Passive storage might be purely neural; active selection and manipulation might require consciousness's participation. The attention-as-interface hypothesis implies consciousness acts through attention on neural patterns—WM manipulation could be this interface in action.

## Prefrontal Cortex and Executive Functions

Research on PFC role in WM:

1. **Delay period activity**: PFC shows sustained activity during WM delay, specific to stimulus being remembered
2. **Task relevance**: PFC only encodes task-relevant information—resistant to distractors
3. **Executive functions**: PFC circuitry is critical to executive-attention functions (shifting, updating, inhibition)

However, recent findings question whether the central executive is as "central" as Baddeley proposed. There may be multiple separable executive functions that can vary independently and be selectively impaired.

**Relevance to site**: The 2025 COGITATE results found conscious perception tracked by posterior cortex, not prefrontal. This suggests PFC executive functions (including WM manipulation) are distinct from conscious content. The interface may be where these systems meet—PFC executes control while posterior regions hold conscious content.

## Connection to Autonoetic Consciousness

Tulving (2002) proposed that manipulating episodic memories creates autonoetic consciousness—awareness of subjective time through past recall and future imagination.

This connects WM to temporal self-consciousness:
- WM provides temporal bridge
- Episodic buffer enables multimodal binding
- Autonoetic consciousness enables mental time travel

The Map's autonoetic-consciousness article notes hippocampal binding operates for both episodic memory and scene perception. WM may be the active workspace where bound episodic content becomes available for manipulation and mental time travel.

## Implications for Site Framework

### Attention-as-Interface

The WM–attention link strengthens the interface hypothesis:
- Attention determines what enters WM
- WM contents guide attention
- This bidirectional relationship is where consciousness may exert influence
- The ~10 bits/second bandwidth constraint noted in the Map's coupling law research matches WM capacity limitations

### Temporal Consciousness

WM may underlie the specious present:
- The 100ms–5s experienced moment corresponds to WM capacity
- Husserlian retention-protention structure maps onto WM's brief backward and forward reach
- The phenomenal "now" may be WM at work

### The Binding Connection

WM binding (episodic buffer) and perceptual binding may share mechanisms:
- Both integrate multimodal information
- Both make bound representations available to consciousness
- The hippocampus participates in both
- Quantum binding hypothesis could apply to both

### Consciousness as Executive Function?

Miller (neuroscientist) claims: "Working memory is what we use when we think. It is the contents of consciousness, not just the thoughts but what we do with them."

But the Map would qualify this: WM contents correlate with consciousness, but WM manipulation may be how consciousness acts on neural content rather than being consciousness itself. The distinction between having conscious content and manipulating conscious content matters.

## Research Questions for Site

1. **Does mental effort in WM manipulation differ from attention alone?** the Map links mental effort to consciousness's causal influence. WM manipulation feels effortful—is this the phenomenology of the interface at work?

2. **What happens to WM in altered states?** Meditation, psychedelics, anesthesia all alter both WM and consciousness. Filter theory would predict dissociations—WM capacity might remain while conscious access changes.

3. **How does WM relate to quantum timescales?** WM operates over seconds; quantum effects at nanoseconds. How does the Map's minimal quantum interaction scale up to WM timescales? The activity-silent hypothesis (synaptic calcium ~1s) may be relevant—what happens at the synaptic level during WM maintenance?

4. **Is there WM in dreams?** Dream phenomenology includes experienced duration but limited executive function. How does this bear on the WM–consciousness relationship?

## Candidate Article Topics

Based on this research, potential article topics:

1. **Concept page: Working Memory** — Core WM models, relationship to consciousness, executive functions, temporal bridge function

2. **Cross-review attention.md**: Add explicit WM connection—the attention-WM bidirectional relationship strengthens the interface hypothesis

3. **Cross-review specious-present.md**: Add WM as neural correlate of experienced duration

4. **Cross-review mental-effort.md**: WM manipulation as effortful attention in action

## Sources

- Baddeley, A. & Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. Psychology of Learning and Motivation.
- Soto, D., Mäntylä, T., & Silvanto, J. (2011). Working memory without consciousness. Current Biology.
- Baars, B. (1988). A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness.
- Tulving, E. (2002). Episodic memory: From mind to brain. Annual Review of Psychology.
- Hitch, G.J., Allen, R.J., & Baddeley, A.D. (2025). The multicomponent model of working memory fifty years on. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology.
- Pöppel, E. (1997). A hierarchical model of temporal perception. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
- Stokes, M.G. (2015). 'Activity-silent' working memory in prefrontal cortex: a dynamic coding framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences.
