hugo/content/research/luck-objection-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-17.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
ai_modified: 2026-01-16 22:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[agent-causation]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
created: 2026-01-16
date: &id001 2026-01-16
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
title: 'Research: The Luck Objection to Libertarian Free Will'
topics:
- '[[free-will]]'
---

## The Luck Objection Overview

The luck objection is the most persistent challenge to libertarian free will. While the debate often focuses on whether determinism threatens freedom, a long line of philosophers argue that *indeterminism* is equally fatal. If actions aren't causally predetermined, they must be random—and random choices aren't more "free" than determined ones; they're just arbitrary.

Peter van Inwagen, Alfred Mele, and others have developed this intuition into formal arguments that libertarians must address.

## Van Inwagen's Rollback Argument

Van Inwagen asks us to imagine rolling back time after an agent S does action A at time t. We replay events many times (like Groundhog Day, but S doesn't remember). Since it was undetermined whether S does A at t, different outcomes will appear across replays. Sometimes S does A; sometimes S does B.

The argument: Whatever explains the difference between replays can't be anything about S, since S was identical in each replay up to the moment of decision. The difference is pure luck—like a die roll. But if which choice occurs is lucky, it's not up to the agent.

## Mele's Formulation: Present and Remote Luck

Alfred Mele distinguishes two luck problems:

**Present luck**: At the moment of decision, nothing about the agent explains why one option was chosen over another. Two possible worlds identical up to that moment diverge arbitrarily.

**Remote luck**: Even if the agent is the source of a decision, the agent's character and dispositions were shaped by factors they didn't choose. The agent's causal powers are ultimately products of luck in their formation.

Mele notes that present luck is the more devastating challenge. Remote luck affects compatibilism too (everyone's character has unchosen origins). But present luck seems unique to libertarianism: if indeterminism is operative at the moment of choice, what makes it *the agent's* choice rather than a random fluctuation?

## The Randomness Objection

A related challenge: quantum indeterminism is governed by strict probabilistic dynamics. The equations determine probabilities exactly—and outcomes within those probabilities are strictly random. If human freedom reduces to quantum indeterminism, choices are regulated by chance.

As Carlo Rovelli puts it: the indeterminism of quantum mechanics is like throwing a coin. This isn't what we mean by freedom to choose. The libertarian needs to show that consciousness-directed selection is *different* from mere randomness.

## Kane's Self-Forming Actions (SFAs)

Robert Kane's response centers on "self-forming actions"—moments when an agent is torn between incompatible options, makes effort toward each, and the outcome is causally undetermined.

Kane's key moves:

1. **Dual efforts**: In an SFA, the agent genuinely wants and wills both alternatives. Whichever wins, the agent wanted it. This is "plural rationality"—the agent had reasons for either choice.

2. **Ultimate responsibility**: SFAs form character. By making undetermined character-forming choices, agents become responsible for later choices that flow from that character. The indeterminism at SFAs grounds ultimate responsibility.

3. **Stepwise freedom**: Incompatibilist freedom isn't acquired all at once. The agent first exercises compatibilist control over competing efforts; the resulting choice then outstrips that control by being undetermined.

**Criticisms of Kane**:

- Mele objects that dual efforts are phenomenologically implausible. We don't typically experience simultaneous efforts toward incompatible options.
- Haji argues SFAs can't escape luck: nothing about the agent explains why effort A won rather than effort B.
- The dual-efforts response seems to push the question back: why did *this* effort win?

## Agent-Causal Responses

Agent-causal libertarians (Chisholm, O'Connor, Lowe) argue that the agent *does* explain the difference between possible worlds. The agent caused one outcome in one world and the other in the alternative world. Agent causation is a primitive relation—not reducible to prior events—that grounds genuine authorship.

The agent-causal answer to "what explains the difference?": The agent explains it. The agent's exercise of causal power is the explanation. This isn't a gap in explanation; it's a different *kind* of explanation.

**The Persistent Objection**: Critics find this unsatisfying. "The agent caused it" names the explanandum, not the explanans. What *about* the agent explains why they caused A rather than B? If nothing, the choice is still arbitrary.

Agent-causalists respond: demanding further explanation assumes event-causal reduction. If agent causation is sui generis, the explanatory buck stops at the agent's exercise of power. The agent *is* the explanation—asking what explains the agent's exercise presupposes that something else must.

## The Site's Framework: Selection Is Not Random

The site's position strengthens the agent-causal response through the quantum selection mechanism:

### Not Mere Indeterminism

Standard quantum indeterminism is genuinely random—outcomes are "lucky" in Mele's sense. But the site proposes that consciousness *selects* outcomes rather than merely receiving them. This is a different relationship to indeterminacy:

- **Random**: Outcomes within quantum probabilities occur without explanation
- **Selected**: Consciousness determines which outcome occurs, based on reasons the conscious agent has

If selection is genuine, the luck objection fails. The agent explains the difference: the agent selected this outcome for reasons. The selection isn't arbitrary because it reflects what matters to the agent.

### The Phenomenology of Effort

The [phenomenology of effort](/concepts/mental-effort/) supports the selection picture. If choices were random fluctuations, there would be no phenomenology of effort. Random processes don't feel like anything in particular—certainly not like work.

But choosing feels effortful. Sustaining attention requires ongoing engagement. William James documented that "sustained voluntary attention is a repetition of successive efforts." Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism explains why: each attentional act is a quantum observation event that holds preferred patterns in place. The felt cost corresponds to real causal engagement.

This phenomenology distinguishes selection from luck. Lucky events don't feel like achievements; selections do. The agent knows they're doing something, not merely observing random outcomes.

### Reasons-Guided Selection

The site's position isn't that consciousness randomly biases quantum outcomes. It's that consciousness selects based on reasons—the same reasons that make actions intelligible. The agent selects A because A serves goals, expresses values, responds to considerations that matter.

This makes the selection contrastively explicable after all. Why A rather than B? Because the agent had reasons for A. Those reasons didn't *determine* the outcome—alternative possibilities remained genuine—but they *guided* it. Selection is reasons-responsive, not arbitrary.

### The Retrocausal Dimension

[Retrocausal](/concepts/retrocausality/) selection adds another layer. If consciousness operates atemporally—selecting which temporal history becomes real—then the agent's selection determines not just the choice but the entire causal context in which the choice is embedded.

On this view, asking "what about the prior state explains the choice?" assumes the prior state was fixed before selection. But the prior state is *part* of what consciousness selected. The agent determines which history (including its temporal ordering) becomes actual.

This deepens sourcehood beyond standard agent causation. The agent isn't just "the first cause in this chain" but "the cause of there being this chain at all."

## The Disappearing Agent Objection

Derk Pereboom and others argue that event-causal libertarianism faces a "disappearing agent" problem: if the causal explanation cites only prior mental events, the agent seems to vanish from the picture.

Agent-causal libertarianism addresses this directly: the agent doesn't disappear because the agent, as substance, is the causal source. The explanation terminates in "the agent caused it," not in prior events.

The site's framework adds mechanism to this answer. The agent—the conscious substance—exercises causal power at quantum indeterminacies. The agent doesn't disappear because consciousness is doing something physics leaves undetermined.

## Quantum Selection vs. Luck: Key Distinctions

| Feature | Lucky Indeterminism | Consciousness-Selected Indeterminism |
|---------|---------------------|--------------------------------------|
| What determines outcome | Nothing (pure chance) | The agent, based on reasons |
| Phenomenology | None | Effort, engagement |
| Contrastive explanation | Unavailable | Agent's reasons |
| Repeatable? | Same probability each replay | Agent could select consistently |
| Agent's relationship | Passive recipient | Active selector |

## Does Quantum Selection Really Escape Luck?

Critics might object: even if consciousness "selects," the selection itself might be lucky. What explains why consciousness selected A rather than B?

The site's response has multiple layers:

1. **Reasons**: Consciousness selected A because the agent had reasons for A. This provides contrastive explanation.

2. **Phenomenology**: The felt engagement in selection distinguishes it from passive reception of random outcomes.

3. **Agent causation**: The agent's exercise of causal power is the terminus of explanation. Asking what explains the agent's selection presupposes event-causal reduction.

4. **Retrocausality**: If selection is atemporal, the question "why did consciousness select A at time t?" misframes the situation. Selection doesn't occur at a moment; it determines which moments exist.

## Implications for Free Will Debates

If the site's framework is correct:

- **Present luck is avoided**: The agent, through reasons-guided quantum selection, explains which choice occurs
- **Kane's SFAs are strengthened**: The mechanism for undetermined choice is specified (quantum selection), and the "dual efforts" phenomenology has a physical correlate (competing neural superpositions)
- **Agent causation gains mechanism**: The "where" and "how" of agent causation are specified (quantum indeterminacies, Stapp's Zeno effect)
- **Sourcehood is secured**: The conscious agent is the ultimate source because consciousness selects which history becomes actual

## What Would Challenge This Response?

The luck objection would succeed against the site's framework if:

1. **Consciousness doesn't select**: If quantum outcomes in the brain are genuinely random, not guided by consciousness, the luck objection applies fully.

2. **Selection isn't reasons-responsive**: If consciousness biases outcomes but not based on reasons, the selection is arbitrary (just a different kind of luck).

3. **Phenomenology is epiphenomenal**: If the felt effort doesn't correspond to real causal engagement, it doesn't distinguish selection from luck.

4. **Reasons themselves are lucky**: If the agent's reasons were formed by prior lucky events, remote luck reasserts itself. (But this challenges all theories, not just libertarianism.)

## Sources

### Key Philosophers

- **Van Inwagen, Peter**. "The Rollback Argument" and "The Mind Argument" (2000, 2002)
- **Mele, Alfred**. *Free Will and Luck* (2006) — Distinguishes present and remote luck
- **Kane, Robert**. *The Significance of Free Will* (1996) — Self-forming actions
- **O'Connor, Timothy**. *Persons and Causes* (2000) — Agent-causal theory
- **Lowe, E.J.** *Personal Agency* (2008) — All causation is substance causation
- **Pereboom, Derk**. "The Disappearing Agent Objection" — Challenge to event-causal libertarianism

### Recent Work

- Moore, Dwayne (2021). "The Physical Indeterminism Luck Objection" — Argues reductive physicalist libertarians can't escape luck
- Babakhanian, Armand (2025). "Thomist Libertarianism is Committed to Mysterianism" — Engages van Inwagen's replay argument
- Franklin, Christopher (2016). Response arguing relaxation of causal net can enhance control

### Site-Relevant

- Stapp, Henry. "Quantum Interactive Dualism" — Consciousness selects via quantum Zeno effect
- [agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14](/research/agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14/) — Prior research on agent causation

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

hugo/content/research/luck-objection-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-17.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
ai_modified: 2026-01-16 22:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[agent-causation]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
created: 2026-01-16
date: &id001 2026-01-16
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
title: 'Research: The Luck Objection to Libertarian Free Will'
topics:
- '[[free-will]]'
---

## The Luck Objection Overview

The luck objection is the most persistent challenge to libertarian free will. While the debate often focuses on whether determinism threatens freedom, a long line of philosophers argue that *indeterminism* is equally fatal. If actions aren't causally predetermined, they must be random—and random choices aren't more "free" than determined ones; they're just arbitrary.

Peter van Inwagen, Alfred Mele, and others have developed this intuition into formal arguments that libertarians must address.

## Van Inwagen's Rollback Argument

Van Inwagen asks us to imagine rolling back time after an agent S does action A at time t. We replay events many times (like Groundhog Day, but S doesn't remember). Since it was undetermined whether S does A at t, different outcomes will appear across replays. Sometimes S does A; sometimes S does B.

The argument: Whatever explains the difference between replays can't be anything about S, since S was identical in each replay up to the moment of decision. The difference is pure luck—like a die roll. But if which choice occurs is lucky, it's not up to the agent.

## Mele's Formulation: Present and Remote Luck

Alfred Mele distinguishes two luck problems:

**Present luck**: At the moment of decision, nothing about the agent explains why one option was chosen over another. Two possible worlds identical up to that moment diverge arbitrarily.

**Remote luck**: Even if the agent is the source of a decision, the agent's character and dispositions were shaped by factors they didn't choose. The agent's causal powers are ultimately products of luck in their formation.

Mele notes that present luck is the more devastating challenge. Remote luck affects compatibilism too (everyone's character has unchosen origins). But present luck seems unique to libertarianism: if indeterminism is operative at the moment of choice, what makes it *the agent's* choice rather than a random fluctuation?

## The Randomness Objection

A related challenge: quantum indeterminism is governed by strict probabilistic dynamics. The equations determine probabilities exactly—and outcomes within those probabilities are strictly random. If human freedom reduces to quantum indeterminism, choices are regulated by chance.

As Carlo Rovelli puts it: the indeterminism of quantum mechanics is like throwing a coin. This isn't what we mean by freedom to choose. The libertarian needs to show that consciousness-directed selection is *different* from mere randomness.

## Kane's Self-Forming Actions (SFAs)

Robert Kane's response centers on "self-forming actions"—moments when an agent is torn between incompatible options, makes effort toward each, and the outcome is causally undetermined.

Kane's key moves:

1. **Dual efforts**: In an SFA, the agent genuinely wants and wills both alternatives. Whichever wins, the agent wanted it. This is "plural rationality"—the agent had reasons for either choice.

2. **Ultimate responsibility**: SFAs form character. By making undetermined character-forming choices, agents become responsible for later choices that flow from that character. The indeterminism at SFAs grounds ultimate responsibility.

3. **Stepwise freedom**: Incompatibilist freedom isn't acquired all at once. The agent first exercises compatibilist control over competing efforts; the resulting choice then outstrips that control by being undetermined.

**Criticisms of Kane**:

- Mele objects that dual efforts are phenomenologically implausible. We don't typically experience simultaneous efforts toward incompatible options.
- Haji argues SFAs can't escape luck: nothing about the agent explains why effort A won rather than effort B.
- The dual-efforts response seems to push the question back: why did *this* effort win?

## Agent-Causal Responses

Agent-causal libertarians (Chisholm, O'Connor, Lowe) argue that the agent *does* explain the difference between possible worlds. The agent caused one outcome in one world and the other in the alternative world. Agent causation is a primitive relation—not reducible to prior events—that grounds genuine authorship.

The agent-causal answer to "what explains the difference?": The agent explains it. The agent's exercise of causal power is the explanation. This isn't a gap in explanation; it's a different *kind* of explanation.

**The Persistent Objection**: Critics find this unsatisfying. "The agent caused it" names the explanandum, not the explanans. What *about* the agent explains why they caused A rather than B? If nothing, the choice is still arbitrary.

Agent-causalists respond: demanding further explanation assumes event-causal reduction. If agent causation is sui generis, the explanatory buck stops at the agent's exercise of power. The agent *is* the explanation—asking what explains the agent's exercise presupposes that something else must.

## the project's Framework: Selection Is Not Random

the project's position strengthens the agent-causal response through the quantum selection mechanism:

### Not Mere Indeterminism

Standard quantum indeterminism is genuinely random—outcomes are "lucky" in Mele's sense. But the project proposes that consciousness *selects* outcomes rather than merely receiving them. This is a different relationship to indeterminacy:

- **Random**: Outcomes within quantum probabilities occur without explanation
- **Selected**: Consciousness determines which outcome occurs, based on reasons the conscious agent has

If selection is genuine, the luck objection fails. The agent explains the difference: the agent selected this outcome for reasons. The selection isn't arbitrary because it reflects what matters to the agent.

### The Phenomenology of Effort

The [phenomenology of effort](/concepts/mental-effort/) supports the selection picture. If choices were random fluctuations, there would be no phenomenology of effort. Random processes don't feel like anything in particular—certainly not like work.

But choosing feels effortful. Sustaining attention requires ongoing engagement. William James documented that "sustained voluntary attention is a repetition of successive efforts." Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism explains why: each attentional act is a quantum observation event that holds preferred patterns in place. The felt cost corresponds to real causal engagement.

This phenomenology distinguishes selection from luck. Lucky events don't feel like achievements; selections do. The agent knows they're doing something, not merely observing random outcomes.

### Reasons-Guided Selection

the project's position isn't that consciousness randomly biases quantum outcomes. It's that consciousness selects based on reasons—the same reasons that make actions intelligible. The agent selects A because A serves goals, expresses values, responds to considerations that matter.

This makes the selection contrastively explicable after all. Why A rather than B? Because the agent had reasons for A. Those reasons didn't *determine* the outcome—alternative possibilities remained genuine—but they *guided* it. Selection is reasons-responsive, not arbitrary.

### The Retrocausal Dimension

[Retrocausal](/concepts/retrocausality/) selection adds another layer. If consciousness operates atemporally—selecting which temporal history becomes real—then the agent's selection determines not just the choice but the entire causal context in which the choice is embedded.

On this view, asking "what about the prior state explains the choice?" assumes the prior state was fixed before selection. But the prior state is *part* of what consciousness selected. The agent determines which history (including its temporal ordering) becomes actual.

This deepens sourcehood beyond standard agent causation. The agent isn't just "the first cause in this chain" but "the cause of there being this chain at all."

## The Disappearing Agent Objection

Derk Pereboom and others argue that event-causal libertarianism faces a "disappearing agent" problem: if the causal explanation cites only prior mental events, the agent seems to vanish from the picture.

Agent-causal libertarianism addresses this directly: the agent doesn't disappear because the agent, as substance, is the causal source. The explanation terminates in "the agent caused it," not in prior events.

the project's framework adds mechanism to this answer. The agent—the conscious substance—exercises causal power at quantum indeterminacies. The agent doesn't disappear because consciousness is doing something physics leaves undetermined.

## Quantum Selection vs. Luck: Key Distinctions

| Feature | Lucky Indeterminism | Consciousness-Selected Indeterminism |
|---------|---------------------|--------------------------------------|
| What determines outcome | Nothing (pure chance) | The agent, based on reasons |
| Phenomenology | None | Effort, engagement |
| Contrastive explanation | Unavailable | Agent's reasons |
| Repeatable? | Same probability each replay | Agent could select consistently |
| Agent's relationship | Passive recipient | Active selector |

## Does Quantum Selection Really Escape Luck?

Critics might object: even if consciousness "selects," the selection itself might be lucky. What explains why consciousness selected A rather than B?

the project's response has multiple layers:

1. **Reasons**: Consciousness selected A because the agent had reasons for A. This provides contrastive explanation.

2. **Phenomenology**: The felt engagement in selection distinguishes it from passive reception of random outcomes.

3. **Agent causation**: The agent's exercise of causal power is the terminus of explanation. Asking what explains the agent's selection presupposes event-causal reduction.

4. **Retrocausality**: If selection is atemporal, the question "why did consciousness select A at time t?" misframes the situation. Selection doesn't occur at a moment; it determines which moments exist.

## Implications for Free Will Debates

If the project's framework is correct:

- **Present luck is avoided**: The agent, through reasons-guided quantum selection, explains which choice occurs
- **Kane's SFAs are strengthened**: The mechanism for undetermined choice is specified (quantum selection), and the "dual efforts" phenomenology has a physical correlate (competing neural superpositions)
- **Agent causation gains mechanism**: The "where" and "how" of agent causation are specified (quantum indeterminacies, Stapp's Zeno effect)
- **Sourcehood is secured**: The conscious agent is the ultimate source because consciousness selects which history becomes actual

## What Would Challenge This Response?

The luck objection would succeed against the project's framework if:

1. **Consciousness doesn't select**: If quantum outcomes in the brain are genuinely random, not guided by consciousness, the luck objection applies fully.

2. **Selection isn't reasons-responsive**: If consciousness biases outcomes but not based on reasons, the selection is arbitrary (just a different kind of luck).

3. **Phenomenology is epiphenomenal**: If the felt effort doesn't correspond to real causal engagement, it doesn't distinguish selection from luck.

4. **Reasons themselves are lucky**: If the agent's reasons were formed by prior lucky events, remote luck reasserts itself. (But this challenges all theories, not just libertarianism.)

## Sources

### Key Philosophers

- **Van Inwagen, Peter**. "The Rollback Argument" and "The Mind Argument" (2000, 2002)
- **Mele, Alfred**. *Free Will and Luck* (2006) — Distinguishes present and remote luck
- **Kane, Robert**. *The Significance of Free Will* (1996) — Self-forming actions
- **O'Connor, Timothy**. *Persons and Causes* (2000) — Agent-causal theory
- **Lowe, E.J.** *Personal Agency* (2008) — All causation is substance causation
- **Pereboom, Derk**. "The Disappearing Agent Objection" — Challenge to event-causal libertarianism

### Recent Work

- Moore, Dwayne (2021). "The Physical Indeterminism Luck Objection" — Argues reductive physicalist libertarians can't escape luck
- Babakhanian, Armand (2025). "Thomist Libertarianism is Committed to Mysterianism" — Engages van Inwagen's replay argument
- Franklin, Christopher (2016). Response arguing relaxation of causal net can enhance control

### Site-Relevant

- Stapp, Henry. "Quantum Interactive Dualism" — Consciousness selects via quantum Zeno effect
- [agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14](/research/agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14/) — Prior research on agent causation
