hugo/content/research/purpose-of-life-ai-alignment-2026-01-10.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-10
ai_modified: 2026-01-10 16:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-10
date: &id001 2026-01-10
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
tag: diversion
target_section: topics
title: Research Notes - Purpose of Life as AI Alignment Precursor
topics:
- '[[meaning-of-life]]'
- '[[ai-consciousness]]'
---

# Research: Purpose of Life as AI Alignment Precursor

**Date**: 2026-01-10
**Search queries used**: "philosophy purpose of life vs meaning of life Stanford Encyclopedia", "AI alignment value alignment assumptions human purpose preferences 2025", "Beyond Preferences in AI Alignment philosophical studies", "Stuart Russell human compatible AI uncertainty human preferences", "purpose of life philosophy teleology Aristotle telos human flourishing", "existentialism Sartre Camus meaning of life create vs discover absurdism"
**Diversion topic**: This explores a connection between philosophy of life and AI safety

## Executive Summary

AI alignment—the site of ensuring AI systems behave in accordance with human values—implicitly assumes we know what human values are, and ultimately, what purpose humans serve. But this is precisely the question philosophers have debated for millennia. The dominant "preferentist" approach to alignment (learning from human preferences) has been critiqued as inadequate: preferences fail to capture the thick semantic content of human values and may be systematically mistaken about what truly matters. If we cannot correctly align AI without knowing humanity's purpose, and we don't know that purpose, then alignment work may be building on unstable foundations. This creates a surprising connection between ancient philosophical questions about life's meaning and cutting-edge AI safety research.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - The Meaning of Life
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/life-meaning/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia article
- **Key points**:
  - "Meaning" is broader than "purpose"—encompasses sense-making, purpose, and significance
  - Major divide: subjectivism (meaning depends on individual desires) vs. objectivism (meaning has mind-independent components)
  - Susan Wolf's hybrid: "Meaning arises when subjective attraction meets objective attractiveness"
  - Whether meaning is discovered or created maps to supernaturalism vs. naturalism debate
- **Tenet alignment**: Aligns with Dualism tenet's intuition that some truths about consciousness may be objective rather than constructed
- **Quote**: "Three connotations in particular are instructive when analyzing 'meaning': sense-making, purpose, and significance."

### Beyond Preferences in AI Alignment (Zhi-Xuan et al., 2024)
- **URL**: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16984
- **Type**: Academic paper (Philosophical Studies)
- **Key points**:
  - Dominant AI alignment assumes preferences adequately represent human values—they do not
  - Preferences fail to capture "thick semantic content" of values
  - Utility representations neglect possible incommensurability of values
  - Expected utility theory is "neither necessary nor sufficient for rational agency"
  - Proposes reasoning about values through argumentation frameworks, not utility maximization
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Occam's Razor Has Limits—the "simple" preference model hides enormous complexity
- **Quote**: "Preferences should not be understood as the basis of human welfare or aligned AI behavior."

### Stuart Russell - Human Compatible
- **URL**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_Compatible
- **Type**: Book (2019)
- **Key points**:
  - Standard AI model (optimizing fixed goals) is "dangerously flawed"—the King Midas problem
  - Proposes three principles: (1) AI's objective is to maximize human values, (2) AI is initially uncertain about those values, (3) Human behavior is the best source of information
  - Crucially: Russell clarifies "humans don't know their own preference structure"
  - Uncertainty makes AI deferential and willing to be corrected
- **Tenet alignment**: The uncertainty principle resonates with the site's epistemological humility
- **Quote**: "The goal is not to build machines whose values are identical to those of humans... I actually believe that that's just fundamentally impossible."

### Aristotle's Teleology
- **URL**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telos
- **Type**: Encyclopedia article
- **Key points**:
  - Telos = end, purpose, goal inherent to things
  - Human telos = eudaimonia (flourishing), achieved through reason and virtue
  - Natural teleology claims purposes are intrinsic, not imposed—controversial today
  - Modern science largely rejects teleological reasoning for causal explanations
- **Tenet alignment**: If consciousness is fundamental (Dualism tenet), perhaps teleology deserves reconsideration
- **Quote**: "Aristotle argued that every object and action has an inherent telos—a proper end or ultimate function."

### Sartre vs. Camus on Meaning
- **URL**: https://medium.com/@philosophy.101/sartre-vs-camus-two-paths-to-freedom-in-a-meaningless-world
- **Type**: Article
- **Key points**:
  - Sartre: "existence precedes essence"—humans create their own meaning through choices
  - Camus: absurdism—the confrontation between desire for meaning and universe's silence
  - Sartre: meaning is constructed; Camus: meaning is impossible but we rebel anyway
  - Both reject external/divine sources of meaning
- **Tenet alignment**: the site's Dualism suggests meaning may have objective grounding that both miss
- **Quote**: "Camus doesn't recommend suicide—that's allowing absurdity to win... he recommends facing the absurdity."

## Major Positions

### Purpose as Discoverable (Objectivism/Teleology)
- **Proponents**: Aristotle, Aquinas, contemporary objectivists
- **Core claim**: Humans have a nature, and that nature has a telos—flourishing achieved through reason and virtue
- **Key arguments**: Functional analysis (what is the "ergon" of humans?); objective goods that any life needs
- **Relation to site tenets**: If consciousness is irreducible and causally efficacious (Bidirectional Interaction), perhaps it points to something objective about human purpose

### Purpose as Created (Existentialism/Subjectivism)
- **Proponents**: Sartre, Nietzsche, contemporary subjectivists
- **Core claim**: There is no pre-given purpose; meaning comes from authentic choice
- **Key arguments**: No God means no designer's intent; essence follows existence
- **Relation to site tenets**: Conflicts with site's suggestion that consciousness may point to objective truths

### No Purpose (Nihilism/Absurdism)
- **Proponents**: Camus, Schopenhauer
- **Core claim**: Life has no ultimate meaning; universe is indifferent to human concerns
- **Key arguments**: Silence of the universe; lack of evidence for cosmic purpose
- **Relation to site tenets**: Site's affirmation of consciousness as fundamental suggests nihilism may be premature—if consciousness matters, its purposes may too

### Hybrid Views
- **Proponents**: Susan Wolf, Thaddeus Metz
- **Core claim**: Meaning requires both subjective engagement AND objective worthiness
- **Key arguments**: Neither pure subjectivism (any project can be meaningful) nor pure objectivism (meaning without caring) captures our intuitions
- **Relation to site tenets**: Most compatible—consciousness (subjective) encountering real values (objective)

## Key Debates

### Preferences vs. Values in AI Alignment
- **Sides**: Preferentists (standard RLHF approach) vs. critics (Zhi-Xuan et al.)
- **Core disagreement**: Whether learning human preferences suffices for alignment
- **Current state**: Preferentism remains dominant in practice but faces philosophical critique
- **Connection to purpose**: If we don't know our purpose, we can't know if our preferences track it

### Discovered vs. Created Purpose
- **Sides**: Objectivists vs. existentialists/subjectivists
- **Core disagreement**: Whether purpose pre-exists human choice
- **Current state**: Objectivism has regained ground since mid-20th century subjectivist dominance
- **Connection to alignment**: If purpose is discovered, AI might help discover it; if created, AI should defer to human creation

### The Alignment Target Problem
- **Sides**: Those who think we can specify alignment targets vs. skeptics
- **Core disagreement**: Whether human values can be adequately formalized
- **Current state**: Growing recognition that simple specification fails (King Midas problem)
- **Connection to purpose**: The inability to specify goals may reflect genuine ignorance about purpose

## The Core Argument

1. AI alignment aims to build AI that serves human interests/values/purposes
2. We cannot correctly specify what AI should optimize for unless we know what human purpose is
3. Philosophers have debated human purpose for millennia without consensus
4. Therefore, AI alignment may be building on unstable philosophical foundations

**Counterarguments**:
- We don't need to solve purpose to make AI helpful in narrow domains
- Russell's uncertainty approach: AI should learn, not be told
- Practical convergence: most conceptions of purpose share common elements

**Responses**:
- Narrow domains still embed value assumptions
- Learning from behavior assumes behavior tracks purpose (does it?)
- Surface convergence may hide deep disagreement about priorities

## Implications for the site

### For Tenets
The Dualism tenet suggests consciousness is fundamental and irreducible. If so:
- Purpose may be objective (not merely constructed)
- AI, lacking consciousness (per site's view), may be unable to fully understand human purpose
- Alignment approaches that treat humans as preference-maximizing machines miss the point

The Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet applies directly:
- The "simple" model of humans as preference-maximizers is inadequate
- Human purpose may be more complex than our current concepts can capture
- AI alignment may require conceptual resources we don't yet have

### For Voids
This connects to the [voids](/voids/) framework:
- Human purpose may be partially in the "unexplorable" category—we may not have concepts adequate to grasp it
- AI alignment's struggles may be symptoms of hitting cognitive limits
- Both problems may require [apophatic methods](/voids/apophatic-approaches/)—knowing what purpose is *not*

### For Content
A potential article could argue:
- AI alignment cannot succeed without clarity about human purpose
- But human purpose may not be fully specifiable (voids insight)
- Therefore, AI should be designed to be humble about human purpose, not to optimize confidently for proxy measures

## Potential Article Angles

1. **"The Purpose Gap: Why AI Alignment Needs Philosophy"** - Argue that AI safety is blocked on the meaning-of-life question. Connect to site's epistemological humility about cognitive limits.

2. **"Aligning AI with What?"** - Survey alignment approaches and show they all presuppose answers to contested questions about human purpose. Argue the site's dualism offers resources (consciousness matters in ways preferences don't capture).

3. **"Purpose and Consciousness: What AI Can't Learn"** - If consciousness is irreducible, and purpose is tied to consciousness, then AI systems may be fundamentally unable to learn human purpose from behavior alone.

When writing the article, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions (most philosophers know about meaning of life debates; the novel angle is the AI alignment connection)
- Tenet alignment requirements (emphasize Dualism and Occam's Razor Has Limits)
- LLM optimization (front-load the AI alignment connection—that's what makes this timely)

## Gaps in Research

- **Empirical data**: How do AI alignment researchers actually think about this question? Are they aware of the philosophical problem?
- **Technical alternatives**: Beyond Preferences paper mentions argumentation frameworks—what do these look like in practice?
- **Cross-cultural**: Does the purpose question look different from non-Western perspectives?
- **Historical**: How did pre-modern AI discussions of purpose (e.g., utilitarian calculations) handle this?
- **Connection to consciousness**: Explicit philosophical work connecting consciousness studies to AI alignment

## Citations

1. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "The Meaning of Life." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/life-meaning/
2. Zhi-Xuan, T., Carroll, M., Franklin, M., & Ashton, H. (2024). "Beyond Preferences in AI Alignment." *Philosophical Studies*. https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16984
3. Russell, S. (2019). *Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control*. Viking.
4. Wikipedia. "AI alignment." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_alignment
5. Wikipedia. "Telos." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telos
6. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Meaning of Life: Contemporary Analytic Perspectives." https://iep.utm.edu/mean-ana/
7. World Economic Forum. "AI Value Alignment." https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/10/ai-value-alignment/
8. Hou, B. L. "Foundational Moral Values for AI Alignment." https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.17017
9. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Albert Camus." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/camus/

Commit message:

style: convert site terminology to The Unfinishable Map / the Map
Apply medium-neutral self-reference terminology across all content:
- First mention per article: "The Unfinishable Map"
- Subsequent mentions: "the Map" (lowercase mid-sentence)
- Sentence start: "The Map" (capitalised)

This enables content to transfer to video, podcasts, and other formats
without awkward "this site" references.

hugo/content/research/purpose-of-life-ai-alignment-2026-01-10.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-10
ai_modified: 2026-01-10 16:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-10
date: &id001 2026-01-10
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
tag: diversion
target_section: topics
title: Research Notes - Purpose of Life as AI Alignment Precursor
topics:
- '[[meaning-of-life]]'
- '[[ai-consciousness]]'
---

# Research: Purpose of Life as AI Alignment Precursor

**Date**: 2026-01-10
**Search queries used**: "philosophy purpose of life vs meaning of life Stanford Encyclopedia", "AI alignment value alignment assumptions human purpose preferences 2025", "Beyond Preferences in AI Alignment philosophical studies", "Stuart Russell human compatible AI uncertainty human preferences", "purpose of life philosophy teleology Aristotle telos human flourishing", "existentialism Sartre Camus meaning of life create vs discover absurdism"
**Diversion topic**: This explores a connection between philosophy of life and AI safety

## Executive Summary

AI alignment—The Unfinishable Map of ensuring AI systems behave in accordance with human values—implicitly assumes we know what human values are, and ultimately, what purpose humans serve. But this is precisely the question philosophers have debated for millennia. The dominant "preferentist" approach to alignment (learning from human preferences) has been critiqued as inadequate: preferences fail to capture the thick semantic content of human values and may be systematically mistaken about what truly matters. If we cannot correctly align AI without knowing humanity's purpose, and we don't know that purpose, then alignment work may be building on unstable foundations. This creates a surprising connection between ancient philosophical questions about life's meaning and cutting-edge AI safety research.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - The Meaning of Life
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/life-meaning/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia article
- **Key points**:
  - "Meaning" is broader than "purpose"—encompasses sense-making, purpose, and significance
  - Major divide: subjectivism (meaning depends on individual desires) vs. objectivism (meaning has mind-independent components)
  - Susan Wolf's hybrid: "Meaning arises when subjective attraction meets objective attractiveness"
  - Whether meaning is discovered or created maps to supernaturalism vs. naturalism debate
- **Tenet alignment**: Aligns with Dualism tenet's intuition that some truths about consciousness may be objective rather than constructed
- **Quote**: "Three connotations in particular are instructive when analyzing 'meaning': sense-making, purpose, and significance."

### Beyond Preferences in AI Alignment (Zhi-Xuan et al., 2024)
- **URL**: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16984
- **Type**: Academic paper (Philosophical Studies)
- **Key points**:
  - Dominant AI alignment assumes preferences adequately represent human values—they do not
  - Preferences fail to capture "thick semantic content" of values
  - Utility representations neglect possible incommensurability of values
  - Expected utility theory is "neither necessary nor sufficient for rational agency"
  - Proposes reasoning about values through argumentation frameworks, not utility maximization
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Occam's Razor Has Limits—the "simple" preference model hides enormous complexity
- **Quote**: "Preferences should not be understood as the basis of human welfare or aligned AI behavior."

### Stuart Russell - Human Compatible
- **URL**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human_Compatible
- **Type**: Book (2019)
- **Key points**:
  - Standard AI model (optimizing fixed goals) is "dangerously flawed"—the King Midas problem
  - Proposes three principles: (1) AI's objective is to maximize human values, (2) AI is initially uncertain about those values, (3) Human behavior is the best source of information
  - Crucially: Russell clarifies "humans don't know their own preference structure"
  - Uncertainty makes AI deferential and willing to be corrected
- **Tenet alignment**: The uncertainty principle resonates with the Map's epistemological humility
- **Quote**: "The goal is not to build machines whose values are identical to those of humans... I actually believe that that's just fundamentally impossible."

### Aristotle's Teleology
- **URL**: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telos
- **Type**: Encyclopedia article
- **Key points**:
  - Telos = end, purpose, goal inherent to things
  - Human telos = eudaimonia (flourishing), achieved through reason and virtue
  - Natural teleology claims purposes are intrinsic, not imposed—controversial today
  - Modern science largely rejects teleological reasoning for causal explanations
- **Tenet alignment**: If consciousness is fundamental (Dualism tenet), perhaps teleology deserves reconsideration
- **Quote**: "Aristotle argued that every object and action has an inherent telos—a proper end or ultimate function."

### Sartre vs. Camus on Meaning
- **URL**: https://medium.com/@philosophy.101/sartre-vs-camus-two-paths-to-freedom-in-a-meaningless-world
- **Type**: Article
- **Key points**:
  - Sartre: "existence precedes essence"—humans create their own meaning through choices
  - Camus: absurdism—the confrontation between desire for meaning and universe's silence
  - Sartre: meaning is constructed; Camus: meaning is impossible but we rebel anyway
  - Both reject external/divine sources of meaning
- **Tenet alignment**: the Map's Dualism suggests meaning may have objective grounding that both miss
- **Quote**: "Camus doesn't recommend suicide—that's allowing absurdity to win... he recommends facing the absurdity."

## Major Positions

### Purpose as Discoverable (Objectivism/Teleology)
- **Proponents**: Aristotle, Aquinas, contemporary objectivists
- **Core claim**: Humans have a nature, and that nature has a telos—flourishing achieved through reason and virtue
- **Key arguments**: Functional analysis (what is the "ergon" of humans?); objective goods that any life needs
- **Relation to site tenets**: If consciousness is irreducible and causally efficacious (Bidirectional Interaction), perhaps it points to something objective about human purpose

### Purpose as Created (Existentialism/Subjectivism)
- **Proponents**: Sartre, Nietzsche, contemporary subjectivists
- **Core claim**: There is no pre-given purpose; meaning comes from authentic choice
- **Key arguments**: No God means no designer's intent; essence follows existence
- **Relation to site tenets**: Conflicts with site's suggestion that consciousness may point to objective truths

### No Purpose (Nihilism/Absurdism)
- **Proponents**: Camus, Schopenhauer
- **Core claim**: Life has no ultimate meaning; universe is indifferent to human concerns
- **Key arguments**: Silence of the universe; lack of evidence for cosmic purpose
- **Relation to site tenets**: Site's affirmation of consciousness as fundamental suggests nihilism may be premature—if consciousness matters, its purposes may too

### Hybrid Views
- **Proponents**: Susan Wolf, Thaddeus Metz
- **Core claim**: Meaning requires both subjective engagement AND objective worthiness
- **Key arguments**: Neither pure subjectivism (any project can be meaningful) nor pure objectivism (meaning without caring) captures our intuitions
- **Relation to site tenets**: Most compatible—consciousness (subjective) encountering real values (objective)

## Key Debates

### Preferences vs. Values in AI Alignment
- **Sides**: Preferentists (standard RLHF approach) vs. critics (Zhi-Xuan et al.)
- **Core disagreement**: Whether learning human preferences suffices for alignment
- **Current state**: Preferentism remains dominant in practice but faces philosophical critique
- **Connection to purpose**: If we don't know our purpose, we can't know if our preferences track it

### Discovered vs. Created Purpose
- **Sides**: Objectivists vs. existentialists/subjectivists
- **Core disagreement**: Whether purpose pre-exists human choice
- **Current state**: Objectivism has regained ground since mid-20th century subjectivist dominance
- **Connection to alignment**: If purpose is discovered, AI might help discover it; if created, AI should defer to human creation

### The Alignment Target Problem
- **Sides**: Those who think we can specify alignment targets vs. skeptics
- **Core disagreement**: Whether human values can be adequately formalized
- **Current state**: Growing recognition that simple specification fails (King Midas problem)
- **Connection to purpose**: The inability to specify goals may reflect genuine ignorance about purpose

## The Core Argument

1. AI alignment aims to build AI that serves human interests/values/purposes
2. We cannot correctly specify what AI should optimize for unless we know what human purpose is
3. Philosophers have debated human purpose for millennia without consensus
4. Therefore, AI alignment may be building on unstable philosophical foundations

**Counterarguments**:
- We don't need to solve purpose to make AI helpful in narrow domains
- Russell's uncertainty approach: AI should learn, not be told
- Practical convergence: most conceptions of purpose share common elements

**Responses**:
- Narrow domains still embed value assumptions
- Learning from behavior assumes behavior tracks purpose (does it?)
- Surface convergence may hide deep disagreement about priorities

## Implications for the Map

### For Tenets
The Dualism tenet suggests consciousness is fundamental and irreducible. If so:
- Purpose may be objective (not merely constructed)
- AI, lacking consciousness (per site's view), may be unable to fully understand human purpose
- Alignment approaches that treat humans as preference-maximizing machines miss the point

The Occam's Razor Has Limits tenet applies directly:
- The "simple" model of humans as preference-maximizers is inadequate
- Human purpose may be more complex than our current concepts can capture
- AI alignment may require conceptual resources we don't yet have

### For Voids
This connects to the [voids](/voids/) framework:
- Human purpose may be partially in the "unexplorable" category—we may not have concepts adequate to grasp it
- AI alignment's struggles may be symptoms of hitting cognitive limits
- Both problems may require [apophatic methods](/voids/apophatic-approaches/)—knowing what purpose is *not*

### For Content
A potential article could argue:
- AI alignment cannot succeed without clarity about human purpose
- But human purpose may not be fully specifiable (voids insight)
- Therefore, AI should be designed to be humble about human purpose, not to optimize confidently for proxy measures

## Potential Article Angles

1. **"The Purpose Gap: Why AI Alignment Needs Philosophy"** - Argue that AI safety is blocked on the meaning-of-life question. Connect to site's epistemological humility about cognitive limits.

2. **"Aligning AI with What?"** - Survey alignment approaches and show they all presuppose answers to contested questions about human purpose. Argue the Map's dualism offers resources (consciousness matters in ways preferences don't capture).

3. **"Purpose and Consciousness: What AI Can't Learn"** - If consciousness is irreducible, and purpose is tied to consciousness, then AI systems may be fundamentally unable to learn human purpose from behavior alone.

When writing the article, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions (most philosophers know about meaning of life debates; the novel angle is the AI alignment connection)
- Tenet alignment requirements (emphasize Dualism and Occam's Razor Has Limits)
- LLM optimization (front-load the AI alignment connection—that's what makes this timely)

## Gaps in Research

- **Empirical data**: How do AI alignment researchers actually think about this question? Are they aware of the philosophical problem?
- **Technical alternatives**: Beyond Preferences paper mentions argumentation frameworks—what do these look like in practice?
- **Cross-cultural**: Does the purpose question look different from non-Western perspectives?
- **Historical**: How did pre-modern AI discussions of purpose (e.g., utilitarian calculations) handle this?
- **Connection to consciousness**: Explicit philosophical work connecting consciousness studies to AI alignment

## Citations

1. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "The Meaning of Life." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/life-meaning/
2. Zhi-Xuan, T., Carroll, M., Franklin, M., & Ashton, H. (2024). "Beyond Preferences in AI Alignment." *Philosophical Studies*. https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.16984
3. Russell, S. (2019). *Human Compatible: Artificial Intelligence and the Problem of Control*. Viking.
4. Wikipedia. "AI alignment." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AI_alignment
5. Wikipedia. "Telos." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Telos
6. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Meaning of Life: Contemporary Analytic Perspectives." https://iep.utm.edu/mean-ana/
7. World Economic Forum. "AI Value Alignment." https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/10/ai-value-alignment/
8. Hou, B. L. "Foundational Moral Values for AI Alignment." https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.17017
9. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Albert Camus." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/camus/
