hugo/content/research/quantum-mechanics-free-will-2026-01-16.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
ai_modified: 2026-01-16 02:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[agent-causation]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
created: 2026-01-16
date: &id001 2026-01-16
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14]]'
title: 'Research: Quantum Mechanics and Free Will'
topics:
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Research notes on the relationship between quantum mechanics and libertarian free will. Gathered to strengthen the site's engagement with the philosophical literature on whether quantum indeterminacy helps or hinders free will.

## Executive Summary

The relationship between quantum mechanics and free will is contested. While quantum theory undermines classical determinism, critics argue that quantum randomness doesn't yield genuine freedom—it yields random will. The "luck objection" holds that indeterminism makes outcomes arbitrary rather than controlled. However, several sophisticated responses exist: Kane's effort-of-will theory where indeterminacy is in the effort itself, agent-causal accounts where substances exercise irreducible powers at indeterminacies, and Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism where mental effort sustains neural patterns. Key finding for the site: the debate confirms that quantum indeterminacy provides conceptual space for mental causation but requires an account of how consciousness *directs* rather than *randomizes* outcomes—exactly what the site's framework provides.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia: Incompatibilist Theories of Free Will
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Distinguishes event-causal from agent-causal libertarianism
  - Event-causal: mental events cause actions indeterministically
  - Agent-causal: agents as substances directly cause actions
  - The "luck objection" is the central challenge to all libertarian views
  - No consensus on whether quantum indeterminism occurs at the right neurological locations
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports Bidirectional Interaction (consciousness causes outcomes)
- **Quote**: "There is currently no good evidence that determinism is true."

### Kane's Libertarianism (2024)
- **URL**: https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/the-complex-tapestry-of-free-will-a-free-will-odyssey/
- **Type**: Book review (NDPR)
- **Key points**:
  - Kane now endorses agent-causal elements alongside event-causal framework
  - Free action requires agents "exercising teleological guidance control over some of their processes"
  - Indeterminacy is located in the *effort of will*, not the decision itself
  - Effort's indeterminacy is analogous to position/momentum indeterminacy
  - Kane argues exact sameness across worlds is undefined for indeterminate efforts
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports site framework—Kane's teleological guidance maps onto consciousness-selecting model
- **Quote**: "The causation of free action must bring in reference to agents, qua substances, understood as complex dynamical systems."

### Van Inwagen's Consequence Argument
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-arguments/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - The Consequence Argument: if determinism is true, our acts are consequences of laws and past states we didn't choose
  - The Mind Argument: indeterminism makes acts "a matter of chance" without agent control
  - Together, these form the "libertarian dilemma"—free will seems incompatible with both determinism and indeterminism
  - Van Inwagen himself is a libertarian but calls free will a "mystery"
- **Tenet alignment**: Poses the challenge; site framework addresses by specifying how consciousness resolves indeterminacy
- **Quote**: "An act that occurs by chance, if an event that occurs by chance can be called an act, cannot be under the control of its alleged agent."

### Mele on Soft Libertarianism (2024)
- **URL**: https://philpapers.org/rec/MELSLA-2
- **Type**: Journal article
- **Key points**:
  - "Soft libertarianism" leaves open compatibility but prefers indeterminism for better freedom
  - Published "Soft Libertarianism and Quantum Randomizers" in *Journal of Value Inquiry* (2024)
  - Distinguishes "hard" libertarianism (incompatibilist) from "soft" (agnostic on compatibility)
  - Appeals to accumulated past actions to address present-luck worries
- **Tenet alignment**: Neutral—methodologically modest position
- **Quote**: "Few philosophers today believe that the universe is causally deterministic."

### Stapp's Quantum Zeno Mechanism
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Mental effort (attention) protracts neural pattern lifetime via quantum Zeno effect
  - Persistent rapid probing produces same "answer" from physical world
  - Ion channels in synaptic walls as sites where consciousness controls brain
  - Consciousness causes collapse through intentional acts correlated with state reductions
- **Tenet alignment**: Directly supports Minimal Quantum Interaction and mental effort mechanism
- **Quote**: "A quantum-Zeno-effect-based mechanism is described that allows conscious intentions to influence brain activity in a functionally appropriate way."

### O'Connor and Lowe on Substance Causation
- **URL**: https://philpapers.org/rec/OCOAC
- **Type**: Journal articles / Books
- **Key points**:
  - All causation is fundamentally substance causation (agents exercising powers)
  - Event causation is derivative—shorthand for substances doing things
  - O'Connor (2021) adopts neo-Aristotelian framework
  - Lowe (2008): "Substances, not events, are the causal source of all change"
  - Low-level indeterminacy + multiple realizability bypass reductionist challenges
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Dualism and Bidirectional Interaction
- **Quote**: "All causation is fundamentally substance causation—the causation of events by substances." (Lowe)

## Major Positions

### Position 1: Quantum Randomness Doesn't Help (Skeptical)
- **Proponents**: Van Inwagen (partially), Mele (presents worry), critics generally
- **Core claim**: Quantum indeterminism gives us random will, not free will. If prior physical states don't determine outcomes, outcomes are arbitrary—luck, not choice.
- **Key arguments**:
  - The luck objection: nothing about agent explains why one choice rather than another
  - Identical-world cases show the arbitrariness
  - Random events aren't more "free" than determined events
- **Relation to site tenets**: This is the challenge site framework must answer. The luck objection is serious only if consciousness doesn't direct quantum outcomes; if it does, outcomes aren't arbitrary.

### Position 2: Event-Causal Libertarianism (Kane)
- **Proponents**: Robert Kane, Mark Balaguer, Laura Ekstrom
- **Core claim**: Mental events (beliefs, desires, efforts) cause actions through nondeterministic processes. Indeterminism provides openness; mental events provide rational causation.
- **Key arguments**:
  - Self-forming willings (SFWs) are genuinely open decisions
  - Indeterminacy in effort of will, not bare randomness
  - Agent's trying counts as doing even when effort is indeterminate
  - Kane (2024) now incorporates agent-causal elements
- **Relation to site tenets**: Partially aligned. Kane's recent move toward substance causation strengthens compatibility. His teleological guidance control echoes consciousness-selecting model.

### Position 3: Agent-Causal Libertarianism
- **Proponents**: Chisholm, O'Connor, Lowe, Hasker, Clarke
- **Core claim**: Agents as substances directly cause actions; causation isn't reducible to prior events. The agent is the source—an "unmoved mover."
- **Key arguments**:
  - Event chains trace back infinitely without ultimate source
  - Agent causation stops regress at the conscious subject
  - Substance causation is the fundamental form of causation
  - Neo-Aristotelian framework: agents exercise irreducible causal powers
- **Relation to site tenets**: Strongly aligned. Bidirectional Interaction is agent-causal: consciousness (substance) selects outcomes (causes events). the site specifies quantum mechanism; philosophers provide metaphysical framework.

### Position 4: Quantum Consciousness Mechanisms (Stapp)
- **Proponents**: Stapp, von Neumann, Wigner (historical), Schwartz
- **Core claim**: Consciousness interacts with physics specifically at quantum measurements. Mental effort directs which quantum outcomes actualize.
- **Key arguments**:
  - Quantum Zeno effect: rapid probing sustains neural patterns
  - Ion channels as sites for consciousness-brain interaction
  - Mental effort has phenomenological reality that matches causal engagement
  - Orthodox quantum mechanics allows observer's "choice" role
- **Relation to site tenets**: Direct support for both Minimal Quantum Interaction and mental effort as mechanism. Site's framework is a version of Stapp's position.

### Position 5: Compatibilist Rejection
- **Proponents**: Fischer, Frankfurt, Dennett, Hoefer
- **Core claim**: Free will doesn't require indeterminism. Acting from endorsed desires without coercion suffices. Quantum mechanics is irrelevant.
- **Key arguments**:
  - "Could have done otherwise" is not required for moral responsibility
  - Reasons-responsiveness accounts capture what matters for freedom
  - Hoefer: block universe doesn't privilege any time slice as "determiner"
- **Relation to site tenets**: Conflicts with Bidirectional Interaction (which requires genuine mental causation). Site framework goes beyond compatibilist freedom to claim consciousness makes a causal difference.

## Key Debates

### Debate 1: The Luck Objection
- **Sides**: Critics (Mele, Haji) vs. Libertarians (Kane, O'Connor, Clarke)
- **Core disagreement**: Does indeterminism undermine rather than enable free will?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. Kane's effort-based response and O'Connor's substance-causation response remain contested but not refuted. the site's framework offers a resolution: if consciousness *directs* rather than *randomizes* quantum outcomes, luck is irrelevant.

### Debate 2: Where Is Indeterminism Located?
- **Sides**: Centered accounts (indeterminism at decision) vs. Deliberative accounts (indeterminism in reasoning)
- **Core disagreement**: Does free will require indeterminism immediately prior to action, or earlier in deliberation?
- **Current state**: Both have defenders. the site's quantum-selection model is centered: indeterminacy exists at the moment of neural pattern actualization.

### Debate 3: Agent vs. Event Causation
- **Sides**: O'Connor/Lowe/Hasker (agent-causal) vs. Kane/Ekstrom (event-causal)
- **Core disagreement**: Is substance causation required, or do mental events suffice?
- **Current state**: Converging. Kane (2024) now incorporates agent-causal elements. Site framework is agent-causal: consciousness as substance selects outcomes.

### Debate 4: Decoherence and Biological Quantum Effects
- **Sides**: Tegmark (coherence too brief) vs. Penrose/Hameroff/Fisher (biological quantum effects exist)
- **Core disagreement**: Does the brain sustain quantum coherence long enough to matter?
- **Current state**: Empirically open. Recent findings on quantum effects in photosynthesis, bird navigation, and enzyme catalysis support possibility of longer coherence times than early calculations suggested.

## Historical Timeline

| Year | Event/Publication | Significance |
|------|-------------------|--------------|
| 1932 | Von Neumann's *Mathematical Foundations* | Placed observer in quantum formalism |
| 1961 | Wigner "Remarks on Mind-Body Question" | Consciousness causes collapse thesis |
| 1964 | Chisholm "Human Freedom and the Self" | Revived agent causation |
| 1983 | Van Inwagen *An Essay on Free Will* | Consequence Argument, "libertarianism as mystery" |
| 1996 | Kane *The Significance of Free Will* | Major libertarian defense with effort-based response |
| 2000 | O'Connor *Persons and Causes* | Sophisticated agent-causal theory |
| 2001 | Stapp *Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics* | Quantum Zeno mechanism for mental causation |
| 2008 | Lowe *Personal Agency* | All causation as substance causation |
| 2014 | Mele *Free Will and Luck* | Soft libertarianism developed |
| 2021 | O'Connor neo-Aristotelian turn | Agent causation in naturalistic framework |
| 2024 | Kane *Complex Tapestry of Free Will* | Kane incorporates agent-causal elements |
| 2024 | Mele "Soft Libertarianism and Quantum Randomizers" | Latest engagement with quantum randomness |

## Potential Article Angles

Based on this research, site content could:

1. **Strengthen free-will.md's quantum section**: Current coverage is good but could engage more directly with the luck objection and Kane's response. the site's framework answers the luck objection because consciousness *directs* outcomes based on reasons—not randomly.

2. **Cross-reference agent-causation.md with Kane's evolution**: Kane's 2024 move toward substance causation validates the site's agent-causal framework. Worth noting this convergence.

3. **Connect Stapp to site's mechanism**: The Quantum Consciousness page could more explicitly present Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism as a scientific elaboration of the site's philosophical commitments.

When writing or updating articles, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions (what to include/omit—the site already covers much of this)
- Tenet alignment requirements
- LLM optimization (front-load important information)

## Gaps in Research

- **Specific neuroscientific models**: How exactly does quantum indeterminacy map onto neural decision-making architecture? Site has general account but could benefit from more neuroscience detail.
- **Recent experimental work**: Any 2024-2025 empirical studies on quantum effects in neurons or consciousness?
- **Non-Western perspectives**: Are there parallel discussions in non-Western philosophy about chance, causation, and freedom?

## Citations

- Chisholm, Roderick. "Human Freedom and the Self." 1964 Lindley Lecture.
- Hoefer, Carl. "Causal Determinism." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. Summer 2024 ed.
- Kane, Robert. *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 1996.
- Kane, Robert. *The Complex Tapestry of Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 2024.
- Lowe, E.J. *Personal Agency: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action*. Oxford University Press, 2008.
- Mele, Alfred. *Free Will and Luck*. Oxford University Press, 2006.
- Mele, Alfred. "Soft Libertarianism and Quantum Randomizers." *Journal of Value Inquiry* 58 (2024): 651-658.
- O'Connor, Timothy. *Persons and Causes: The Metaphysics of Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 2000.
- O'Connor, Timothy. "Agent Causation." In *The Oxford Handbook of Causation*, ed. Beebee et al. Oxford University Press, 2009.
- Stapp, Henry. *Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics*. Springer, 2001.
- Van Inwagen, Peter. *An Essay on Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 1983.
- "Arguments for Incompatibilism." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-arguments/
- "Incompatibilist (Nondeterministic) Theories of Free Will." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
- "Quantum Approaches to Consciousness." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/

Commit message:

style: convert site terminology to The Unfinishable Map / the Map
Apply medium-neutral self-reference terminology across all content:
- First mention per article: "The Unfinishable Map"
- Subsequent mentions: "the Map" (lowercase mid-sentence)
- Sentence start: "The Map" (capitalised)

This enables content to transfer to video, podcasts, and other formats
without awkward "this site" references.

hugo/content/research/quantum-mechanics-free-will-2026-01-16.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-16
ai_modified: 2026-01-16 02:30:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[agent-causation]]'
- '[[mental-effort]]'
- '[[interactionist-dualism]]'
created: 2026-01-16
date: &id001 2026-01-16
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[agent-causation-libertarian-free-will-2026-01-14]]'
title: 'Research: Quantum Mechanics and Free Will'
topics:
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Research notes on the relationship between quantum mechanics and libertarian free will. Gathered to strengthen The Unfinishable Map's engagement with the philosophical literature on whether quantum indeterminacy helps or hinders free will.

## Executive Summary

The relationship between quantum mechanics and free will is contested. While quantum theory undermines classical determinism, critics argue that quantum randomness doesn't yield genuine freedom—it yields random will. The "luck objection" holds that indeterminism makes outcomes arbitrary rather than controlled. However, several sophisticated responses exist: Kane's effort-of-will theory where indeterminacy is in the effort itself, agent-causal accounts where substances exercise irreducible powers at indeterminacies, and Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism where mental effort sustains neural patterns. Key finding for the Map: the debate confirms that quantum indeterminacy provides conceptual space for mental causation but requires an account of how consciousness *directs* rather than *randomizes* outcomes—exactly what the Map's framework provides.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia: Incompatibilist Theories of Free Will
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Distinguishes event-causal from agent-causal libertarianism
  - Event-causal: mental events cause actions indeterministically
  - Agent-causal: agents as substances directly cause actions
  - The "luck objection" is the central challenge to all libertarian views
  - No consensus on whether quantum indeterminism occurs at the right neurological locations
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports Bidirectional Interaction (consciousness causes outcomes)
- **Quote**: "There is currently no good evidence that determinism is true."

### Kane's Libertarianism (2024)
- **URL**: https://ndpr.nd.edu/reviews/the-complex-tapestry-of-free-will-a-free-will-odyssey/
- **Type**: Book review (NDPR)
- **Key points**:
  - Kane now endorses agent-causal elements alongside event-causal framework
  - Free action requires agents "exercising teleological guidance control over some of their processes"
  - Indeterminacy is located in the *effort of will*, not the decision itself
  - Effort's indeterminacy is analogous to position/momentum indeterminacy
  - Kane argues exact sameness across worlds is undefined for indeterminate efforts
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports site framework—Kane's teleological guidance maps onto consciousness-selecting model
- **Quote**: "The causation of free action must bring in reference to agents, qua substances, understood as complex dynamical systems."

### Van Inwagen's Consequence Argument
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-arguments/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - The Consequence Argument: if determinism is true, our acts are consequences of laws and past states we didn't choose
  - The Mind Argument: indeterminism makes acts "a matter of chance" without agent control
  - Together, these form the "libertarian dilemma"—free will seems incompatible with both determinism and indeterminism
  - Van Inwagen himself is a libertarian but calls free will a "mystery"
- **Tenet alignment**: Poses the challenge; site framework addresses by specifying how consciousness resolves indeterminacy
- **Quote**: "An act that occurs by chance, if an event that occurs by chance can be called an act, cannot be under the control of its alleged agent."

### Mele on Soft Libertarianism (2024)
- **URL**: https://philpapers.org/rec/MELSLA-2
- **Type**: Journal article
- **Key points**:
  - "Soft libertarianism" leaves open compatibility but prefers indeterminism for better freedom
  - Published "Soft Libertarianism and Quantum Randomizers" in *Journal of Value Inquiry* (2024)
  - Distinguishes "hard" libertarianism (incompatibilist) from "soft" (agnostic on compatibility)
  - Appeals to accumulated past actions to address present-luck worries
- **Tenet alignment**: Neutral—methodologically modest position
- **Quote**: "Few philosophers today believe that the universe is causally deterministic."

### Stapp's Quantum Zeno Mechanism
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - Mental effort (attention) protracts neural pattern lifetime via quantum Zeno effect
  - Persistent rapid probing produces same "answer" from physical world
  - Ion channels in synaptic walls as sites where consciousness controls brain
  - Consciousness causes collapse through intentional acts correlated with state reductions
- **Tenet alignment**: Directly supports Minimal Quantum Interaction and mental effort mechanism
- **Quote**: "A quantum-Zeno-effect-based mechanism is described that allows conscious intentions to influence brain activity in a functionally appropriate way."

### O'Connor and Lowe on Substance Causation
- **URL**: https://philpapers.org/rec/OCOAC
- **Type**: Journal articles / Books
- **Key points**:
  - All causation is fundamentally substance causation (agents exercising powers)
  - Event causation is derivative—shorthand for substances doing things
  - O'Connor (2021) adopts neo-Aristotelian framework
  - Lowe (2008): "Substances, not events, are the causal source of all change"
  - Low-level indeterminacy + multiple realizability bypass reductionist challenges
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports Dualism and Bidirectional Interaction
- **Quote**: "All causation is fundamentally substance causation—the causation of events by substances." (Lowe)

## Major Positions

### Position 1: Quantum Randomness Doesn't Help (Skeptical)
- **Proponents**: Van Inwagen (partially), Mele (presents worry), critics generally
- **Core claim**: Quantum indeterminism gives us random will, not free will. If prior physical states don't determine outcomes, outcomes are arbitrary—luck, not choice.
- **Key arguments**:
  - The luck objection: nothing about agent explains why one choice rather than another
  - Identical-world cases show the arbitrariness
  - Random events aren't more "free" than determined events
- **Relation to site tenets**: This is the challenge site framework must answer. The luck objection is serious only if consciousness doesn't direct quantum outcomes; if it does, outcomes aren't arbitrary.

### Position 2: Event-Causal Libertarianism (Kane)
- **Proponents**: Robert Kane, Mark Balaguer, Laura Ekstrom
- **Core claim**: Mental events (beliefs, desires, efforts) cause actions through nondeterministic processes. Indeterminism provides openness; mental events provide rational causation.
- **Key arguments**:
  - Self-forming willings (SFWs) are genuinely open decisions
  - Indeterminacy in effort of will, not bare randomness
  - Agent's trying counts as doing even when effort is indeterminate
  - Kane (2024) now incorporates agent-causal elements
- **Relation to site tenets**: Partially aligned. Kane's recent move toward substance causation strengthens compatibility. His teleological guidance control echoes consciousness-selecting model.

### Position 3: Agent-Causal Libertarianism
- **Proponents**: Chisholm, O'Connor, Lowe, Hasker, Clarke
- **Core claim**: Agents as substances directly cause actions; causation isn't reducible to prior events. The agent is the source—an "unmoved mover."
- **Key arguments**:
  - Event chains trace back infinitely without ultimate source
  - Agent causation stops regress at the conscious subject
  - Substance causation is the fundamental form of causation
  - Neo-Aristotelian framework: agents exercise irreducible causal powers
- **Relation to site tenets**: Strongly aligned. Bidirectional Interaction is agent-causal: consciousness (substance) selects outcomes (causes events). the Map specifies quantum mechanism; philosophers provide metaphysical framework.

### Position 4: Quantum Consciousness Mechanisms (Stapp)
- **Proponents**: Stapp, von Neumann, Wigner (historical), Schwartz
- **Core claim**: Consciousness interacts with physics specifically at quantum measurements. Mental effort directs which quantum outcomes actualize.
- **Key arguments**:
  - Quantum Zeno effect: rapid probing sustains neural patterns
  - Ion channels as sites for consciousness-brain interaction
  - Mental effort has phenomenological reality that matches causal engagement
  - Orthodox quantum mechanics allows observer's "choice" role
- **Relation to site tenets**: Direct support for both Minimal Quantum Interaction and mental effort as mechanism. Site's framework is a version of Stapp's position.

### Position 5: Compatibilist Rejection
- **Proponents**: Fischer, Frankfurt, Dennett, Hoefer
- **Core claim**: Free will doesn't require indeterminism. Acting from endorsed desires without coercion suffices. Quantum mechanics is irrelevant.
- **Key arguments**:
  - "Could have done otherwise" is not required for moral responsibility
  - Reasons-responsiveness accounts capture what matters for freedom
  - Hoefer: block universe doesn't privilege any time slice as "determiner"
- **Relation to site tenets**: Conflicts with Bidirectional Interaction (which requires genuine mental causation). Site framework goes beyond compatibilist freedom to claim consciousness makes a causal difference.

## Key Debates

### Debate 1: The Luck Objection
- **Sides**: Critics (Mele, Haji) vs. Libertarians (Kane, O'Connor, Clarke)
- **Core disagreement**: Does indeterminism undermine rather than enable free will?
- **Current state**: Ongoing. Kane's effort-based response and O'Connor's substance-causation response remain contested but not refuted. the Map's framework offers a resolution: if consciousness *directs* rather than *randomizes* quantum outcomes, luck is irrelevant.

### Debate 2: Where Is Indeterminism Located?
- **Sides**: Centered accounts (indeterminism at decision) vs. Deliberative accounts (indeterminism in reasoning)
- **Core disagreement**: Does free will require indeterminism immediately prior to action, or earlier in deliberation?
- **Current state**: Both have defenders. the Map's quantum-selection model is centered: indeterminacy exists at the moment of neural pattern actualization.

### Debate 3: Agent vs. Event Causation
- **Sides**: O'Connor/Lowe/Hasker (agent-causal) vs. Kane/Ekstrom (event-causal)
- **Core disagreement**: Is substance causation required, or do mental events suffice?
- **Current state**: Converging. Kane (2024) now incorporates agent-causal elements. Site framework is agent-causal: consciousness as substance selects outcomes.

### Debate 4: Decoherence and Biological Quantum Effects
- **Sides**: Tegmark (coherence too brief) vs. Penrose/Hameroff/Fisher (biological quantum effects exist)
- **Core disagreement**: Does the brain sustain quantum coherence long enough to matter?
- **Current state**: Empirically open. Recent findings on quantum effects in photosynthesis, bird navigation, and enzyme catalysis support possibility of longer coherence times than early calculations suggested.

## Historical Timeline

| Year | Event/Publication | Significance |
|------|-------------------|--------------|
| 1932 | Von Neumann's *Mathematical Foundations* | Placed observer in quantum formalism |
| 1961 | Wigner "Remarks on Mind-Body Question" | Consciousness causes collapse thesis |
| 1964 | Chisholm "Human Freedom and the Self" | Revived agent causation |
| 1983 | Van Inwagen *An Essay on Free Will* | Consequence Argument, "libertarianism as mystery" |
| 1996 | Kane *The Significance of Free Will* | Major libertarian defense with effort-based response |
| 2000 | O'Connor *Persons and Causes* | Sophisticated agent-causal theory |
| 2001 | Stapp *Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics* | Quantum Zeno mechanism for mental causation |
| 2008 | Lowe *Personal Agency* | All causation as substance causation |
| 2014 | Mele *Free Will and Luck* | Soft libertarianism developed |
| 2021 | O'Connor neo-Aristotelian turn | Agent causation in naturalistic framework |
| 2024 | Kane *Complex Tapestry of Free Will* | Kane incorporates agent-causal elements |
| 2024 | Mele "Soft Libertarianism and Quantum Randomizers" | Latest engagement with quantum randomness |

## Potential Article Angles

Based on this research, site content could:

1. **Strengthen free-will.md's quantum section**: Current coverage is good but could engage more directly with the luck objection and Kane's response. the Map's framework answers the luck objection because consciousness *directs* outcomes based on reasons—not randomly.

2. **Cross-reference agent-causation.md with Kane's evolution**: Kane's 2024 move toward substance causation validates the Map's agent-causal framework. Worth noting this convergence.

3. **Connect Stapp to site's mechanism**: The Quantum Consciousness page could more explicitly present Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism as a scientific elaboration of the Map's philosophical commitments.

When writing or updating articles, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions (what to include/omit—the Map already covers much of this)
- Tenet alignment requirements
- LLM optimization (front-load important information)

## Gaps in Research

- **Specific neuroscientific models**: How exactly does quantum indeterminacy map onto neural decision-making architecture? Site has general account but could benefit from more neuroscience detail.
- **Recent experimental work**: Any 2024-2025 empirical studies on quantum effects in neurons or consciousness?
- **Non-Western perspectives**: Are there parallel discussions in non-Western philosophy about chance, causation, and freedom?

## Citations

- Chisholm, Roderick. "Human Freedom and the Self." 1964 Lindley Lecture.
- Hoefer, Carl. "Causal Determinism." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. Summer 2024 ed.
- Kane, Robert. *The Significance of Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 1996.
- Kane, Robert. *The Complex Tapestry of Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 2024.
- Lowe, E.J. *Personal Agency: The Metaphysics of Mind and Action*. Oxford University Press, 2008.
- Mele, Alfred. *Free Will and Luck*. Oxford University Press, 2006.
- Mele, Alfred. "Soft Libertarianism and Quantum Randomizers." *Journal of Value Inquiry* 58 (2024): 651-658.
- O'Connor, Timothy. *Persons and Causes: The Metaphysics of Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 2000.
- O'Connor, Timothy. "Agent Causation." In *The Oxford Handbook of Causation*, ed. Beebee et al. Oxford University Press, 2009.
- Stapp, Henry. *Mind, Matter and Quantum Mechanics*. Springer, 2001.
- Van Inwagen, Peter. *An Essay on Free Will*. Oxford University Press, 1983.
- "Arguments for Incompatibilism." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-arguments/
- "Incompatibilist (Nondeterministic) Theories of Free Will." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
- "Quantum Approaches to Consciousness." *Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy*. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/
