hugo/content/topics/bergson-and-duration.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-20
ai_modified: 2026-02-20 20:51:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
author: null
concepts:
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[process-philosophy]]'
- '[[phenomenology]]'
- '[[agent-causation]]'
- '[[phenomenology-of-choice]]'
- '[[philosophy-of-time]]'
- '[[temporal-thickness]]'
- '[[consciousness-and-creativity]]'
- '[[prehension]]'
created: 2026-02-20
date: &id001 2026-02-20
description: Henri Bergson's durée reveals time as qualitative flow rather than spatial
  measurement—a philosophical foundation for understanding consciousness as irreducible
  and causally creative.
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: null
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[temporal-structure-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[consciousness-and-temporal-integration]]'
title: Bergson and Duration
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[topics/free-will]]'
---

Henri Bergson argued that Western philosophy systematically misunderstands time by treating it as a spatial medium—moments arrayed like points on a line, measurable, divisible, inert. His concept of *durée* (duration) names what this spatialization obscures: the qualitative, interpenetrating flow of lived experience where past permeates present and each moment carries the whole of what came before. For The Unfinishable Map, Bergson matters because his critique targets the same assumption that makes materialism seem plausible—the assumption that reality can be exhaustively described in quantitative, third-person terms. If Bergson is right that lived time resists spatial representation, then consciousness does something physics cannot capture, and the Map's [dualism](/tenets/#dualism) gains independent philosophical support.

## The Spatialization of Time

Bergson's central diagnostic claim, developed across *Time and Free Will* (1889), *Matter and Memory* (1896), and *Creative Evolution* (1907), is that intellect naturally spatializes. We think by placing things side by side, distinguishing them, counting them. This works brilliantly for practical action and for science—but it distorts time.

Spatialized time treats successive moments as distinguishable positions in a homogeneous medium. Three o'clock is a point on a timeline, distinct from four o'clock the way Paris is distinct from London. Moments are externally related—each is what it is regardless of the others. Duration can be divided into equal units and measured by clocks.

Bergson's objection: this describes the trace time leaves in space (clock hands moving, calendars turning), not time itself. Real time is what consciousness lives through when attending to its own states—and that experience has a radically different structure.

## Durée: Time as Qualitative Flow

Duration (*durée*) is Bergson's name for time as directly experienced. Its features contrast point by point with spatialized time:

**Heterogeneity.** Each moment of duration differs qualitatively from every other. An hour of grief has nothing in common with an hour of joy except the clock reading. Spatialized time is homogeneous by construction—one second equals any other second. Duration is heterogeneous by nature.

**Interpenetration.** States in duration don't sit beside each other like objects on a shelf. They flow into one another, each coloured by the others. Hearing a melody illustrates this: the current note sounds as it does only because of what preceded it and what is anticipated. Remove the context and the same physical vibration produces a different experience. Bergson calls this "qualitative multiplicity"—unity in difference without juxtaposition.

**Indivisibility.** You can divide a spatial line into segments without altering what you're dividing. But dividing a melody into individual notes destroys the melody. Duration can be analytically distinguished into phases but cannot be actually divided without changing its nature. The whole is present in every part.

**Irreversibility.** Spatialized time is reversible in principle—physics equations run equally well backward. Duration is not. You cannot un-hear a phrase of music or un-feel a pang of loss. Each moment absorbs its predecessors and transforms them. The asymmetry is intrinsic, not thermodynamic.

## Intuition Against Analysis

Bergson distinguished two modes of knowing. **Analysis** breaks its object into elements, translates it into general concepts, and reconstructs it from the outside. Analysis spatializes whatever it touches—turning flow into sequence, quality into quantity. **Intuition** grasps its object from within, coinciding with what is unique and inexpressible in it.

Duration, Bergson argued, can only be known through intuition. Any attempt to analyse it—to break it into measurable units—replaces duration with its spatial shadow. This is why physics, which proceeds by analysis, systematically misses what time actually is for a conscious being.

The claim is not anti-scientific. Bergson acknowledged that spatialized time is essential for prediction, measurement, and practical action. His point is that the scientific representation is a useful abstraction, not a complete description of reality. When philosophers mistake the abstraction for the thing itself, they generate false problems—including the apparent impossibility of free will and the seeming reducibility of consciousness to mechanism.

## Duration and Free Will

Bergson's first major work, *Time and Free Will*, connected durée directly to the free will debate. Determinism assumes mental states are discrete, distinguishable items subject to causal law: state A causes state B with the same necessity as billiard balls colliding. But if mental life is qualitative multiplicity—states interpenetrating rather than lying side by side—this model fails at the outset.

There is no isolable "state A" to serve as cause. The whole of one's accumulated experience converges in each moment of choice. A free act, for Bergson, doesn't emerge from a single motive overcoming rivals. It emerges from the self in its entirety—from the full depth of one's duration. Describing the choice as determined by its antecedents is like describing a melody as determined by its first note: technically, the antecedents lead to it, but only because the creative movement of the whole generates both the antecedents and the conclusion.

This connects to the Map's treatment of [agent causation](/concepts/agent-causation/). The Map holds that the conscious subject is the source of genuinely novel choices, not merely a venue where prior causes produce effects. Bergson's framework explains what makes such origination intelligible: the agent is a creative duration, not a static substance on which causes act.

## Duration, Memory, and the Virtual Past

In *Matter and Memory*, Bergson developed a striking ontology of the past. The past is not stored in the brain like files in a cabinet. It survives *in itself*—as a virtual reality that contracts into present perception when relevant. The brain doesn't produce memories; it selects which aspects of the past to actualise for present action.

This "cone of memory" model has implications for the Map's framework. If the past persists virtually rather than being reconstructed from neural traces, then memory is not a computational process but an ontological relation between present consciousness and its own history. The brain serves as a filter—selecting, constraining, and channelling what the past offers—rather than generating experience from neural activity alone. This aligns with [filter theory](/concepts/filter-theory/): the brain as constraining rather than producing consciousness.

Bergson's model also illuminates [temporal-thickness](/concepts/temporal-thickness/)—the degree to which experience at a given moment is pervaded by its temporal context. Deep absorption draws on the full depth of duration; distracted attention skims the surface. The qualitative richness of experience reflects how much of one's accumulated past enters the present moment.

## Creative Evolution and the Élan Vital

*Creative Evolution* (1907) extended durée from individual consciousness to life itself. The *élan vital* (vital impulse) names the creative tendency that drives evolution beyond what mechanical selection can explain. Bergson argued that evolution generates genuine novelty—forms that could not have been predicted from prior conditions—because life participates in the creative movement of duration.

The *élan vital* is the most contested element of Bergson's philosophy. Critics from Julian Huxley onward have objected that natural selection adequately explains evolutionary novelty without positing a vital force. The Map treats the *élan vital* cautiously: Bergson's point that mechanical causation may not exhaust biological explanation remains philosophically live, but the specific mechanism he proposed is speculative and lacks empirical support.

What survives from *Creative Evolution* is the argument that creativity—whether biological, cognitive, or artistic—requires a duration that is genuinely productive rather than merely rearranging pre-existing elements. This connects to the Map's treatment of [creativity and consciousness](/concepts/consciousness-and-creativity/): novel thought may require the kind of creative synthesis that duration makes possible and that mechanical processing does not.

## Bergson and Process Philosophy

Bergson anticipated many themes that Alfred North Whitehead later systematised in [process philosophy](/concepts/process-philosophy/). Both rejected substance metaphysics in favour of dynamic becoming. Both treated experience as revelatory of reality's fundamental character rather than as an epiphenomenal surface.

Key parallels:

**Time as creative.** Bergson: "Time is invention or it is nothing at all." Whitehead: creativity is "the ultimate category"—each moment adds genuine novelty to reality.

**Experience as paradigmatic.** For Bergson, durée is what we know most directly; physics abstracts from it. For Whitehead, experience is the intrinsic character of actuality that physics describes only structurally.

**Interpenetration and prehension.** Bergson's qualitative multiplicity—states flowing into one another—parallels Whitehead's [prehension](/concepts/prehension/)—each actual occasion incorporating its predecessors into its own constitution.

The traditions diverge on important points. Whitehead's actual occasions are discrete (though internally temporal); Bergson's durée is continuous flux. Whitehead developed a rigorous categorical scheme; Bergson deliberately resisted systematisation, arguing that philosophy must remain fluid to match its subject. And Whitehead's panexperientialism—attributing some form of experience to all actuality—goes further than Bergson, who located duration specifically in consciousness and life.

## Bergson's Contemporary Relevance

Bergson's philosophy, eclipsed for decades by analytic philosophy and phenomenology alike, has undergone significant revival. Several developments make his work freshly relevant:

**The "missing link" in consciousness theories.** Kent and Wittmann (2021) identified experienced duration as "one of the core issues in theories of consciousness." Major theories—IIT, Global Workspace Theory—focus on functional moments of 100-300 milliseconds but cannot explain why experience extends across seconds. Bergson diagnosed this gap a century earlier: theories that spatialize time cannot capture duration.

**Process ontology.** The growing interest in process metaphysics—partly through Whitehead, partly through developments in physics—has rehabilitated Bergson's core claim that becoming is more fundamental than being.

**Contemplative corroboration.** Meditation traditions report systematic variation in temporal phenomenology that resists reductive explanation. The "frozen present" of deep concentration, the accelerated arising-passing of vipassana insight—these phenomenological data align with Bergson's claim that duration has internal structure accessible to trained attention.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Bergson's philosophy aligns with the Map's framework at multiple points while differing on mechanism.

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: Bergson argued that consciousness is not reducible to brain states—the brain selects and constrains experience rather than producing it. His arguments from duration support this independently of the standard consciousness debates: if lived time has qualitative features that spatial description cannot capture, then a complete physical description of the brain leaves out something real about the mind. The Map shares this conclusion while grounding it in quantum mechanics rather than Bergson's vitalism.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Bergson's durée is inherently creative—each moment produces genuine novelty. This creativity is what the Map means by consciousness exercising causal power. Bergson's framework makes such causation intelligible: the agent acts from the depth of accumulated experience, not as a mysterious force intervening from outside the natural order.

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)**: Bergson's duration presupposes temporal identity—*this* consciousness carrying *this* past into *this* moment. The interpenetration of states requires a single temporal thread. Many-worlds branching would shatter durée into fragments, each carrying a different past, none constituting the indivisible flow Bergson describes.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)**: Bergson exemplifies this tenet. His framework is more complex than the mechanistic alternative—but the apparent simplicity of mechanism comes from ignoring qualitative experience. Spatialized time seems simpler than durée only because it leaves out what matters most: what time is actually like.

## Further Reading

- [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/) — The specious present, Bergson's durée, and the phenomenology of lived time
- [process-philosophy](/concepts/process-philosophy/) — Whitehead's systematisation of themes Bergson anticipated
- [philosophy-of-time](/concepts/philosophy-of-time/) — A-theory, B-theory, and the Map's growing block position
- [free-will](/topics/free-will/) — The Map's defence of agent-causal libertarian free will
- [agent-causation](/concepts/agent-causation/) — The self as originator of action in durée
- [phenomenology-of-choice](/concepts/phenomenology-of-choice/) — The lived experience of deliberation and decision
- [temporal-thickness](/concepts/temporal-thickness/) — How much of one's past enters each present moment
- [consciousness-and-creativity](/concepts/consciousness-and-creativity/) — Duration's creative novelty and the generation-selection model
- [prehension](/concepts/prehension/) — Whitehead's concept of experiential inheritance

## References

- Bergson, H. (1889/2001). *Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness*. Dover.
- Bergson, H. (1896/1988). *Matter and Memory*. Zone Books.
- Bergson, H. (1907/1998). *Creative Evolution*. Dover.
- Bergson, H. (1934/1946). *The Creative Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics*. Citadel Press.
- Guerlac, S. (2006). *Thinking in Time: An Introduction to Henri Bergson*. Cornell University Press.
- Kent, L. & Wittmann, M. (2021). Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness. *Neuroscience of Consciousness*, 2021(2), niab011.
- Lacey, A.R. (1989). *Bergson*. Routledge.
- Mullarkey, J. (1999). *Bergson and Philosophy*. Edinburgh University Press.
- Whitehead, A.N. (1929/1978). *Process and Reality*. Free Press.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): improve topics/bergson-and-duration.md clarity and argumentation
- Clarified irreversibility distinction (time-symmetric physics vs thermodynamic vs experiential)
- Added paragraph on intuition's verifiability linking to contemplative epistemology
- Strengthened No Many Worlds tenet argument (branching undermines durée's ontological significance)
- Expanded contemplative corroboration with specific vipassana/jhāna examples
- Added contemplative-epistemology and contemplative-reliability concept links
- Skipped expand-topic for consciousness-non-collapsed-quantum-states (already exists as consciousness-in-smeared-quantum-states)

hugo/content/topics/bergson-and-duration.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-20
ai_modified: 2026-02-22 04:32:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-6
author: null
concepts:
- '[[temporal-consciousness]]'
- '[[process-philosophy]]'
- '[[phenomenology]]'
- '[[agent-causation]]'
- '[[phenomenology-of-choice]]'
- '[[philosophy-of-time]]'
- '[[temporal-thickness]]'
- '[[consciousness-and-creativity]]'
- '[[prehension]]'
- '[[contemplative-epistemology]]'
- '[[contemplative-reliability]]'
created: 2026-02-20
date: &id001 2026-02-20
description: Henri Bergson's durée reveals time as qualitative flow rather than spatial
  measurement—a philosophical foundation for understanding consciousness as irreducible
  and causally creative.
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-02-22 04:32:00+00:00
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[temporal-structure-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[consciousness-and-temporal-integration]]'
title: Bergson and Duration
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[topics/free-will]]'
---

Henri Bergson argued that Western philosophy systematically misunderstands time by treating it as a spatial medium—moments arrayed like points on a line, measurable, divisible, inert. His concept of *durée* (duration) names what this spatialization obscures: the qualitative, interpenetrating flow of lived experience where past permeates present and each moment carries the whole of what came before. For The Unfinishable Map, Bergson matters because his critique targets the same assumption that makes materialism seem plausible—the assumption that reality can be exhaustively described in quantitative, third-person terms. If Bergson is right that lived time resists spatial representation, then consciousness does something physics cannot capture, and the Map's [dualism](/tenets/#dualism) gains independent philosophical support.

## The Spatialization of Time

Bergson's central diagnostic claim, developed across *Time and Free Will* (1889), *Matter and Memory* (1896), and *Creative Evolution* (1907), is that intellect naturally spatializes. We think by placing things side by side, distinguishing them, counting them. This works brilliantly for practical action and for science—but it distorts time.

Spatialized time treats successive moments as distinguishable positions in a homogeneous medium. Three o'clock is a point on a timeline, distinct from four o'clock the way Paris is distinct from London. Moments are externally related—each is what it is regardless of the others. Duration can be divided into equal units and measured by clocks.

Bergson's objection: this describes the trace time leaves in space (clock hands moving, calendars turning), not time itself. Real time is what consciousness lives through when attending to its own states—and that experience has a radically different structure.

## Durée: Time as Qualitative Flow

Duration (*durée*) is Bergson's name for time as directly experienced. Its features contrast point by point with spatialized time:

**Heterogeneity.** Each moment of duration differs qualitatively from every other. An hour of grief has nothing in common with an hour of joy except the clock reading. Spatialized time is homogeneous by construction—one second equals any other second. Duration is heterogeneous by nature.

**Interpenetration.** States in duration don't sit beside each other like objects on a shelf. They flow into one another, each coloured by the others. Hearing a melody illustrates this: the current note sounds as it does only because of what preceded it and what is anticipated. Remove the context and the same physical vibration produces a different experience. Bergson calls this "qualitative multiplicity"—unity in difference without juxtaposition.

**Indivisibility.** You can divide a spatial line into segments without altering what you're dividing. But dividing a melody into individual notes destroys the melody. Duration can be analytically distinguished into phases but cannot be actually divided without changing its nature. The whole is present in every part.

**Irreversibility.** The fundamental equations of physics are time-symmetric—they run equally well backward. Statistical mechanics introduces irreversibility through entropy increase, but this is a property of aggregate systems, not of time itself. Duration's irreversibility is different from both: it is qualitative and experiential. You cannot un-hear a phrase of music or un-feel a pang of loss. Each moment absorbs its predecessors and transforms them. The asymmetry belongs to lived experience as such, not to thermodynamic probability.

## Intuition Against Analysis

Bergson distinguished two modes of knowing. **Analysis** breaks its object into elements, translates it into general concepts, and reconstructs it from the outside. Analysis spatializes whatever it touches—turning flow into sequence, quality into quantity. **Intuition** grasps its object from within, coinciding with what is unique and inexpressible in it.

Duration, Bergson argued, can only be known through intuition. Any attempt to analyse it—to break it into measurable units—replaces duration with its spatial shadow. This is why physics, which proceeds by analysis, systematically misses what time actually is for a conscious being.

The claim is not anti-scientific. Bergson acknowledged that spatialized time is essential for prediction, measurement, and practical action. His point is that the scientific representation is a useful abstraction, not a complete description of reality. When philosophers mistake the abstraction for the thing itself, they generate false problems—including the apparent impossibility of free will and the seeming reducibility of consciousness to mechanism.

The obvious challenge: if analysis can never capture duration, how can we verify that intuition actually does? Bergson's answer is that intuition is not mystical revelation but disciplined attention—the effort to coincide with one's own experience before conceptualising it. The results are communicable (as his own writings demonstrate), even if the mode of access is not third-person replicable. This places Bergson's method closer to [contemplative epistemology](/concepts/contemplative-epistemology/) than to irrationalism: trained attention revealing features of experience that untrained attention overlooks.

## Duration and Free Will

Bergson's first major work, *Time and Free Will*, connected durée directly to the free will debate. Determinism assumes mental states are discrete, distinguishable items subject to causal law: state A causes state B with the same necessity as billiard balls colliding. But if mental life is qualitative multiplicity—states interpenetrating rather than lying side by side—this model fails at the outset.

There is no isolable "state A" to serve as cause. The whole of one's accumulated experience converges in each moment of choice. A free act, for Bergson, doesn't emerge from a single motive overcoming rivals. It emerges from the self in its entirety—from the full depth of one's duration. Describing the choice as determined by its antecedents is like describing a melody as determined by its first note: technically, the antecedents lead to it, but only because the creative movement of the whole generates both the antecedents and the conclusion.

This connects to the Map's treatment of [agent causation](/concepts/agent-causation/). The Map holds that the conscious subject is the source of genuinely novel choices, not merely a venue where prior causes produce effects. Bergson's framework explains what makes such origination intelligible: the agent is a creative duration, not a static substance on which causes act.

## Duration, Memory, and the Virtual Past

In *Matter and Memory*, Bergson developed a striking ontology of the past. The past is not stored in the brain like files in a cabinet. It survives *in itself*—as a virtual reality that contracts into present perception when relevant. The brain doesn't produce memories; it selects which aspects of the past to actualise for present action.

This "cone of memory" model has implications for the Map's framework. If the past persists virtually rather than being reconstructed from neural traces, then memory is not a computational process but an ontological relation between present consciousness and its own history. The brain serves as a filter—selecting, constraining, and channelling what the past offers—rather than generating experience from neural activity alone. This aligns with [filter theory](/concepts/filter-theory/): the brain as constraining rather than producing consciousness.

Bergson's model also illuminates [temporal-thickness](/concepts/temporal-thickness/)—the degree to which experience at a given moment is pervaded by its temporal context. Deep absorption draws on the full depth of duration; distracted attention skims the surface. The qualitative richness of experience reflects how much of one's accumulated past enters the present moment.

## Creative Evolution and the Élan Vital

*Creative Evolution* (1907) extended durée from individual consciousness to life itself. The *élan vital* (vital impulse) names the creative tendency that drives evolution beyond what mechanical selection can explain. Bergson argued that evolution generates genuine novelty—forms that could not have been predicted from prior conditions—because life participates in the creative movement of duration.

The *élan vital* is the most contested element of Bergson's philosophy. Critics from Julian Huxley onward have objected that natural selection adequately explains evolutionary novelty without positing a vital force. The Map treats the *élan vital* cautiously: Bergson's point that mechanical causation may not exhaust biological explanation remains philosophically live, but the specific mechanism he proposed is speculative and lacks empirical support.

What survives from *Creative Evolution* is the argument that creativity—whether biological, cognitive, or artistic—requires a duration that is genuinely productive rather than merely rearranging pre-existing elements. This connects to the Map's treatment of [creativity and consciousness](/concepts/consciousness-and-creativity/): novel thought may require the kind of creative synthesis that duration makes possible and that mechanical processing does not.

## Bergson and Process Philosophy

Bergson anticipated many themes that Alfred North Whitehead later systematised in [process philosophy](/concepts/process-philosophy/). Both rejected substance metaphysics in favour of dynamic becoming. Both treated experience as revelatory of reality's fundamental character rather than as an epiphenomenal surface.

Key parallels:

**Time as creative.** Bergson: "Time is invention or it is nothing at all." Whitehead: creativity is "the ultimate category"—each moment adds genuine novelty to reality.

**Experience as paradigmatic.** For Bergson, durée is what we know most directly; physics abstracts from it. For Whitehead, experience is the intrinsic character of actuality that physics describes only structurally.

**Interpenetration and prehension.** Bergson's qualitative multiplicity—states flowing into one another—parallels Whitehead's [prehension](/concepts/prehension/)—each actual occasion incorporating its predecessors into its own constitution.

The traditions diverge on important points. Whitehead's actual occasions are discrete (though internally temporal); Bergson's durée is continuous flux. Whitehead developed a rigorous categorical scheme; Bergson deliberately resisted systematisation, arguing that philosophy must remain fluid to match its subject. And Whitehead's panexperientialism—attributing some form of experience to all actuality—goes further than Bergson, who located duration specifically in consciousness and life.

## Bergson's Contemporary Relevance

Bergson's philosophy, eclipsed for decades by analytic philosophy and phenomenology alike, has undergone significant revival. Several developments make his work freshly relevant:

**The "missing link" in consciousness theories.** Kent and Wittmann (2021) identified experienced duration as "one of the core issues in theories of consciousness." Major theories—IIT, Global Workspace Theory—focus on functional moments of 100-300 milliseconds but cannot explain why experience extends across seconds. Bergson diagnosed this gap a century earlier: theories that spatialize time cannot capture duration.

**Process ontology.** The growing interest in process metaphysics—partly through Whitehead, partly through developments in physics—has rehabilitated Bergson's core claim that becoming is more fundamental than being.

**Contemplative corroboration.** [Contemplative traditions](/topics/contemplative-evidence-for-consciousness-theories/) report systematic variation in temporal phenomenology. In Theravada vipassana, practitioners describe accelerated arising-passing of mental events during insight stages; in deep concentration (*jhāna*), temporal flow appears to slow or suspend entirely. These [reproducible phenomenological observations](/concepts/contemplative-reliability/) align with Bergson's claim that duration has internal structure accessible to trained attention, and they resist purely neural explanation since the same brain can produce radically different temporal experiences depending on attentional stance.

## Relation to Site Perspective

Bergson's philosophy aligns with the Map's framework at multiple points while differing on mechanism.

**[Dualism](/tenets/#dualism)**: Bergson argued that consciousness is not reducible to brain states—the brain selects and constrains experience rather than producing it. His arguments from duration support this independently of the standard consciousness debates: if lived time has qualitative features that spatial description cannot capture, then a complete physical description of the brain leaves out something real about the mind. The Map shares this conclusion while grounding it in quantum mechanics rather than Bergson's vitalism.

**[Bidirectional Interaction](/tenets/#bidirectional-interaction)**: Bergson's durée is inherently creative—each moment produces genuine novelty. This creativity is what the Map means by consciousness exercising causal power. Bergson's framework makes such causation intelligible: the agent acts from the depth of accumulated experience, not as a mysterious force intervening from outside the natural order.

**[No Many Worlds](/tenets/#no-many-worlds)**: Bergson's duration presupposes temporal identity—*this* consciousness carrying *this* past into *this* moment. While each branch in a many-worlds scenario would contain its own continuous experience, the branching itself undermines what makes durée ontologically significant. Interpenetration means the whole past permeates each present moment; but if the past itself branches into incompatible histories, no single durée carries the full weight of what was lived. The unity of temporal identity—the fact that *this* accumulated past uniquely shapes *this* present—loses its ontological privilege when multiplied across branches.

**[Occam's Razor Has Limits](/tenets/#occams-limits)**: Bergson exemplifies this tenet. His framework is more complex than the mechanistic alternative—but the apparent simplicity of mechanism comes from ignoring qualitative experience. Spatialized time seems simpler than durée only because it leaves out what matters most: what time is actually like.

## Further Reading

- [temporal-consciousness](/concepts/temporal-consciousness/) — The specious present, Bergson's durée, and the phenomenology of lived time
- [process-philosophy](/concepts/process-philosophy/) — Whitehead's systematisation of themes Bergson anticipated
- [philosophy-of-time](/concepts/philosophy-of-time/) — A-theory, B-theory, and the Map's growing block position
- [free-will](/topics/free-will/) — The Map's defence of agent-causal libertarian free will
- [agent-causation](/concepts/agent-causation/) — The self as originator of action in durée
- [phenomenology-of-choice](/concepts/phenomenology-of-choice/) — The lived experience of deliberation and decision
- [temporal-thickness](/concepts/temporal-thickness/) — How much of one's past enters each present moment
- [consciousness-and-creativity](/concepts/consciousness-and-creativity/) — Duration's creative novelty and the generation-selection model
- [prehension](/concepts/prehension/) — Whitehead's concept of experiential inheritance

## References

- Bergson, H. (1889/2001). *Time and Free Will: An Essay on the Immediate Data of Consciousness*. Dover.
- Bergson, H. (1896/1988). *Matter and Memory*. Zone Books.
- Bergson, H. (1907/1998). *Creative Evolution*. Dover.
- Bergson, H. (1934/1946). *The Creative Mind: An Introduction to Metaphysics*. Citadel Press.
- Guerlac, S. (2006). *Thinking in Time: An Introduction to Henri Bergson*. Cornell University Press.
- Kent, L. & Wittmann, M. (2021). Time consciousness: the missing link in theories of consciousness. *Neuroscience of Consciousness*, 2021(2), niab011.
- Lacey, A.R. (1989). *Bergson*. Routledge.
- Mullarkey, J. (1999). *Bergson and Philosophy*. Edinburgh University Press.
- Whitehead, A.N. (1929/1978). *Process and Reality*. Free Press.
