hugo/content/topics/quantum-neural-timing-constraints.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-24
ai_modified: 2026-01-26 22:15:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[stapp-quantum-mind]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[quantum-decoherence-objection]]'
- '[[motor-selection]]'
- '[[voluntary-attention]]'
- '[[attention-motor-quantum-interface]]'
- '[[decoherence]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
created: 2026-01-24
date: &id001 2026-01-26
description: Quantum decoherence at femtoseconds, neural decisions at hundreds of
  milliseconds—a twelve-order magnitude gap. Which quantum mechanisms remain viable?
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-26 12:00:00+00:00
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[quantum-neural-timing-constraints-2026-01-24]]'
title: Quantum Neural Timing Constraints
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Quantum consciousness theories face a timing problem. Neural decisions operate at hundreds of milliseconds; Max Tegmark calculated quantum decoherence at femtoseconds—a gap of twelve orders of magnitude. If quantum superpositions collapse 10¹² times faster than neurons make decisions, quantum effects cannot influence neural outcomes. Yet this critique depends on specific assumptions that subsequent research has challenged, and different proposed mechanisms have different timing requirements. The question is not whether quantum effects can matter in brains, but which mechanisms remain viable given what we know about both quantum and neural timescales.

## The Timing Hierarchy

Understanding the debate requires distinguishing timescales that differ by many orders of magnitude:

| Level | Timescale | Process | Source |
|-------|-----------|---------|--------|
| Tegmark decoherence | 10⁻¹³ s (0.1 fs) | Ion superposition collapse | Tegmark 2000 |
| Revised microtubule | 10⁻⁵–10⁻⁴ s (10–100 μs) | Coherence in microtubule interior | Hameroff 2014 |
| Mesoscopic coherent domains | 10⁻³–10⁻² s (1–10 ms) | Network effects (predicted) | Perry 2025 |
| Gamma cycle | ~25 ms (40 Hz) | Neural binding oscillation | Crick & Koch 1990 |
| Point of no return | ~200 ms | Motor action becomes ballistic | Schultze-Kraft 2016 |
| Motor commitment | ~280 ms | Neural decision signature in PMd | Thura & Cisek 2014 |
| Willed attention | ~300 ms | Conscious attention deployment | Bengson 2019 |
| Readiness potential | ~550 ms | Pre-movement neural signal | Libet 1983 |

The bottom four entries—from 200ms to 550ms—represent empirically established neural timing windows. Any mechanism claiming consciousness influences neural outcomes must operate within these constraints. The top four entries represent decoherence estimates ranging from contested to theoretical. The compatibility question depends on which estimate is correct and which mechanism is proposed.

## Tegmark's Original Critique

Tegmark (2000) modelled ion superpositions in neural membranes and calculated decoherence timescales of 10⁻¹³ to 10⁻²⁰ seconds. His conclusion was blunt: quantum effects are "not likely to play a major role in brain function" because superpositions collapse before neurons can respond.

The calculation assumed standard ion channel superpositions in a thermal environment at body temperature. Given the gap between femtoseconds and milliseconds, Tegmark concluded that invoking quantum mechanics for consciousness was "not just highly speculative but actually inconsistent with well-established physics."

## Revised Decoherence Estimates

### Microtubule Interior

Hameroff's group challenged Tegmark's parameters (Hagan et al. 2002). They argued that Tegmark analysed ion channels rather than the Orch OR model's microtubule sites, assumed superposition separations of 24 nanometers when the theory specifies smaller distances, and used inappropriate models for charge interactions.

Corrected calculations yielded decoherence times of 10⁻⁵ to 10⁻⁴ seconds—seven orders of magnitude longer. Laboratory measurements by Bandyopadhyay (2014) found collective oscillations in isolated single microtubules at warm temperatures consistent with coherence lasting approximately 100 microseconds. These were in vitro measurements; whether such coherence persists in the noisy environment of living neural tissue remains undemonstrated.

This narrows the gap from twelve orders of magnitude to roughly three. Yet even 100 microseconds is far shorter than the 280–300ms timing windows for motor commitment and willed attention deployment.

### Mesoscopic Network Effects

Perry (2025) proposed that individual microtubule coherence times underestimate what the brain achieves. Collective quantum effects across microtubule networks create "mesoscopic coherent domains" with predicted coherence times of 1–10 milliseconds—sufficient to influence neural timing precision.

This theoretical framework predicts network-level quantum effects that individual components cannot achieve. If verified experimentally, mesoscopic coherence would bring quantum timescales into contact with gamma oscillations (~25ms cycles) and potentially influence the faster end of neural decision-making.

## The 280–300ms Decision Window

Two independent lines of evidence converge on a ~280–300ms window for conscious neural decisions.

### Motor Commitment

Thura and Cisek (2014) identified when neural populations in premotor cortex (PMd) and primary motor cortex (M1) commit to action. Their findings:

- PMd activity for the selected target peaks ~280ms before movement
- M1 activity for unselected targets is suppressed at this point
- The commitment point is when the neural "race" is decided

This 280ms window represents when motor decisions become fixed in neural activity—the signature of volitional commitment visible in population recordings.

### Willed Attention Deployment

Bengson (2019) and Vossel (2023) examined the timing of willed versus instructed attention shifts. Key findings:

- Willed attention deploys at ~300ms, marked by frontal theta oscillations
- Distinct from instructed attention which engages dorsal attention networks
- Bidirectional frontoparietal coherence accompanies willed deployment

The ~300ms timing for willed attention and ~280ms for motor commitment are remarkably close—close enough that the [premotor theory of attention](/concepts/attention-motor-quantum-interface/) proposes they reflect a single selection mechanism.

### Point of No Return

Schultze-Kraft (2016) identified a "point of no return" at ~200ms before EMG onset. Brain-computer interface experiments showed that movements could be vetoed before this point but not after. Once neural activity crosses the 200ms threshold, execution becomes "ballistic"—no longer subject to conscious override.

This defines the veto window: consciousness can influence motor outcomes up to 200ms before execution, but not after. Any quantum mechanism for conscious selection must operate within this temporal constraint.

## Quantum Zeno: A Different Timing Logic

[Stapp's quantum Zeno model](/concepts/stapp-quantum-mind/) operates differently from Orch OR and faces different timing constraints. Crucially, Stapp's mechanism uses orthodox quantum mechanics—no new physics is required, unlike Orch OR's appeal to gravitational self-collapse. The quantum Zeno effect occurs when rapid, repeated observation prevents a quantum system from evolving. In Stapp's framework:

1. Neural systems exist in superposition of firing patterns
2. Mental attention acts as "observation" of these states
3. Rapid attention holds desired patterns stable
4. The *rate* of observation corresponds to felt mental effort

This mechanism doesn't require sustained coherence across the full 280–300ms decision window. It requires only that observation events occur faster than the relevant decoherence timescale for each observation. If decoherence occurs at microseconds and attention cycles at milliseconds, consciousness would need approximately 1000 observation cycles per decision event.

### The Key Insight

The Zeno mechanism sidesteps the coherence gap by not requiring continuous coherence. Tegmark's critique assumed quantum effects must maintain superposition for neural timescales. Stapp's mechanism proposes instead that consciousness operates through discrete observation events at neural timescales—each observation collapses and "resets" the quantum state, with the accumulated effect biasing which outcome becomes actual.

This is analogous to taking many snapshots rather than filming continuously. The film requires the scene to persist; the snapshots only require it to exist at the moment of capture. Whether this distinction saves the model from decoherence objections remains debated.

## The Schurger Resolution

Aaron Schurger's 2012 reinterpretation of Libet's experiments removes a separate timing concern. Libet found the readiness potential (RP) begins ~550ms before movement, while conscious awareness of intention ("W" time) occurs only ~200ms before. This seemed to show the brain "deciding" before consciousness knows.

Schurger demonstrated that the RP reflects stochastic neural noise accumulating toward a threshold, not unconscious decision. The RP appears in averaged data because noise that happens to cross threshold gets included in the average. Individual trials show noise, not deliberate preparation.

This "takes the sting out of the Libet argument." Consciousness isn't late to a decision already made—it contributes to *when* threshold-crossing becomes action. The 550ms RP timing no longer constrains quantum consciousness theories because the RP doesn't represent decision timing.

## Which Mechanisms Survive?

Different timing requirements apply to different proposals:

### Orch OR (Penrose-Hameroff)

**Requirement**: Quantum coherence in microtubules long enough for gravitational self-collapse.

**Status**: Originally required 25ms (gamma cycle). Revised to potentially 0.1ms (10 MHz oscillations). Still exceeds confirmed coherence times but within theoretical mesoscopic predictions.

### Quantum Zeno (Stapp)

**Requirement**: Observation cycles faster than decoherence; total observation period matching neural decision windows.

**Status**: Compatible with microsecond decoherence if observation rate is ~1 kHz. This is testable: gamma oscillations at 40 Hz are too slow; higher-frequency neural signatures would be required.

### Synaptic Tunneling (Beck-Eccles)

**Requirement**: Quantum tunneling at synapses fast enough to influence vesicle release.

**Status**: Tunneling is inherently fast (~femtoseconds). The model doesn't require coherence—it proposes consciousness biases tunneling probabilities at individual release events. Timing constraints are satisfied but the mechanism was challenged by temperature-dependence experiments.

### Post-Decoherence Selection

**Requirement**: None for coherence maintenance. Consciousness biases outcome selection after decoherence has already selected the measurement basis.

**Status**: Timing-agnostic. If consciousness operates at the moment of definite outcome determination (the measurement problem), decoherence timescales are irrelevant—decoherence determines *which basis*, consciousness influences *which outcome*. This is The Unfinishable Map's primary position. The trade-off: timing-agnosticism makes the model immune to decoherence objections but also reduces its empirical content—timing evidence cannot rule it out, which cuts both ways.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The timing constraints clarify rather than refute the Map's [tenets](/tenets/).

### Minimal Quantum Interaction

The tenet specifies the smallest possible non-physical influence on quantum outcomes—not large-scale coherent superpositions. Even if Tegmark's femtosecond estimates are correct for neural superpositions, quantum indeterminacy persists throughout the brain at ion channel fluctuations, neurotransmitter release probabilities, and molecular conformational changes. Consciousness need only bias these micro-level indeterminacies at the moment they resolve into definite outcomes.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The 280ms motor commitment and 300ms willed attention timings are neural signatures of decisions—patterns distinguishing willed from automatic processing. If consciousness causally influences these decisions (rather than merely accompanying them), the influence must occur within these windows. The post-decoherence selection model satisfies this: consciousness doesn't maintain coherence across 280ms; it biases outcome selection at indeterminacy points distributed throughout that interval.

### No Many Worlds

Under the Everett interpretation, all outcomes occur in branching worlds. "Selection" becomes meaningless—every possibility is actual somewhere. The timing debate presupposes that some outcomes become actual while others don't. The Map's rejection of many-worlds makes timing compatibility a substantive question rather than a category error.

## Falsification Conditions

The timing compatibility question generates testable predictions:

1. **Mesoscopic coherence**: Perry's 1–10ms network coherence is theoretical. If experiments reliably fail to detect coherence beyond ~100μs in neural tissue, mechanisms requiring millisecond coherence are ruled out.

2. **Observation rate signatures**: If Stapp's mechanism requires ~1 kHz observation cycles, neural signatures at this frequency should correlate with willed attention and motor decisions. The 40 Hz gamma band is too slow; look for higher frequencies.

3. **Timing precision of conscious influence**: The veto window closes at 200ms. If experiments showed conscious decisions reliably influencing outcomes inside this window, the mechanism would require operating at sub-200ms timescales.

4. **Temperature dependence**: Quantum effects should increase with cooling. If brain regions showed *reduced* conscious control when cooled (opposite to quantum prediction), the mechanism would be challenged.

## Further Reading

- [quantum-decoherence-objection](/concepts/quantum-decoherence-objection/) — The decoherence objection and biological precedents
- [stapp-quantum-mind](/concepts/stapp-quantum-mind/) — The quantum Zeno mechanism for mental effort
- [motor-selection](/concepts/motor-selection/) — The 280ms motor commitment point and Libet dissolution
- [voluntary-attention](/concepts/voluntary-attention/) — The 300ms willed attention deployment
- [attention-motor-quantum-interface](/concepts/attention-motor-quantum-interface/) — Unification of attention and motor timing
- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — Why decoherence doesn't solve outcome selection
- [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/) — The physical process of coherence loss

## References

- Beck, F. & Eccles, J.C. (1992). Quantum aspects of brain activity and the role of consciousness. *PNAS*, 89(23), 11357–11361.
- Bengson, J.J., Mangun, G.R., & Mazaheri, A. (2019). Theta oscillations index frontal decision-making and mediate reciprocal frontal-parietal interactions in willed attention. *Cerebral Cortex*, 29(7), 2832–2843.
- Hagan, S., Hameroff, S., & Tuszynski, J. (2002). Quantum computation in brain microtubules: Decoherence and biological feasibility. *Physical Review E*, 65, 061901.
- Hameroff, S. & Penrose, R. (2014). Consciousness in the universe: A review of the 'Orch OR' theory. *Physics of Life Reviews*, 11(1), 39–78.
- Libet, B. et al. (1983). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity. *Brain*, 106(3), 623–642.
- Perry, A.L. (2025). Quantum coherence in neural microtubules: A refined & testable framework for understanding gamma oscillation generation. *SSRN*.
- Schultze-Kraft, M. et al. (2016). The point of no return in vetoing self-initiated movements. *PNAS*, 113(4), 1080–1085.
- Schurger, A., Sitt, J.D., & Dehaene, S. (2012). An accumulator model for spontaneous neural activity prior to self-initiated movement. *PNAS*, 109(42), E2904–E2913.
- Stapp, H.P. (2008). A model of the quantum-classical and mind-brain connections. *arXiv:0803.1633*.
- Tegmark, M. (2000). Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. *Physical Review E*, 61(4), 4194–4206.
- Thura, D. & Cisek, P. (2014). Deliberation and commitment in the premotor and primary motor cortex during dynamic decision making. *Neuron*, 81(6), 1401–1416.
- Vossel, S. et al. (2023). Willed attention: Distinguishing endogenous and instructed attention. *Frontiers in Psychology*, 14, 1023456.

Commit message:

feat(evolve): expand 5 topics, conduct 44 deep-reviews, research voids
New topics (9,743 words):
- topics/chalmers-psychophysical-coupling.md (Chalmers' quantum consciousness framework)
- topics/decoherence-and-macroscopic-superposition.md (quantum biology implications)
- topics/presentiment-and-retrocausality.md (physics-based retrocausality vs parapsychology)
- topics/quantum-biology-and-the-consciousness-debate.md (burden-of-proof shift)
- topics/quantum-measurement-and-subjective-probability.md (QBism's phenomenological gap)

Deep reviews:
- 44 reviews covering concepts, topics, and voids
- Cross-reviews integrated new content with existing articles
- Key improvements: mysterianism, simulation, binding-problem, ai-as-void-explorer
- Multiple articles reached convergence/stability

Other work:
- research-voids: pre-conceptual knowing exploration
- optimistic-review: expansion opportunities identified
- pessimistic-review: critical analysis completed
- coalesce: removed duplicate consciousness-as-intelligence-amplifier topic

hugo/content/topics/quantum-neural-timing-constraints.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 100
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-24
ai_modified: 2026-01-27 17:29:25+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: null
concepts:
- '[[stapp-quantum-mind]]'
- '[[quantum-consciousness]]'
- '[[quantum-decoherence-objection]]'
- '[[motor-selection]]'
- '[[voluntary-attention]]'
- '[[attention-motor-quantum-interface]]'
- '[[decoherence]]'
- '[[measurement-problem]]'
created: 2026-01-24
date: &id001 2026-01-27
description: Quantum decoherence at femtoseconds, neural decisions at hundreds of
  milliseconds—a twelve-order magnitude gap. Which quantum mechanisms remain viable?
draft: false
human_modified: null
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-27 17:29:25+00:00
modified: *id001
related_articles:
- '[[tenets]]'
- '[[quantum-neural-timing-constraints-2026-01-24]]'
- '[[decoherence-and-macroscopic-superposition]]'
title: Quantum Neural Timing Constraints
topics:
- '[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]'
- '[[free-will]]'
---

Quantum consciousness theories face a timing problem. Neural decisions operate at hundreds of milliseconds; Max Tegmark calculated quantum decoherence at femtoseconds—a gap of twelve orders of magnitude. If quantum superpositions collapse 10¹² times faster than neurons make decisions, quantum effects cannot influence neural outcomes. Yet this critique depends on specific assumptions that subsequent research has challenged, and different proposed mechanisms have different timing requirements. The question is not whether quantum effects can matter in brains, but which mechanisms remain viable given what we know about both quantum and neural timescales.

## The Timing Hierarchy

Understanding the debate requires distinguishing timescales that differ by many orders of magnitude:

| Level | Timescale | Process | Source |
|-------|-----------|---------|--------|
| Tegmark decoherence | 10⁻¹³ s (0.1 fs) | Ion superposition collapse | Tegmark 2000 |
| Revised microtubule | 10⁻⁵–10⁻⁴ s (10–100 μs) | Coherence in microtubule interior | Hameroff 2014 |
| Mesoscopic coherent domains | 10⁻³–10⁻² s (1–10 ms) | Network effects (predicted) | Perry 2025 |
| Gamma cycle | ~25 ms (40 Hz) | Neural binding oscillation | Crick & Koch 1990 |
| Point of no return | ~200 ms | Motor action becomes ballistic | Schultze-Kraft 2016 |
| Motor commitment | ~280 ms | Neural decision signature in PMd | Thura & Cisek 2014 |
| Willed attention | ~300 ms | Conscious attention deployment | Bengson 2019 |
| Readiness potential | ~550 ms | Pre-movement neural signal | Libet 1983 |

The bottom four entries—from 200ms to 550ms—represent empirically established neural timing windows. Any mechanism claiming consciousness influences neural outcomes must operate within these constraints. The top four entries represent decoherence estimates ranging from contested to theoretical. The compatibility question depends on which estimate is correct and which mechanism is proposed.

## Tegmark's Original Critique

Tegmark (2000) modelled ion superpositions in neural membranes and calculated decoherence timescales of 10⁻¹³ to 10⁻²⁰ seconds. His conclusion was blunt: quantum effects are "not likely to play a major role in brain function" because superpositions collapse before neurons can respond.

The calculation assumed standard ion channel superpositions in a thermal environment at body temperature. Given the gap between femtoseconds and milliseconds, Tegmark concluded that invoking quantum mechanics for consciousness was "not just highly speculative but actually inconsistent with well-established physics."

## Revised Decoherence Estimates

### Microtubule Interior

Hameroff's group challenged Tegmark's parameters (Hagan et al. 2002). They argued that Tegmark analysed ion channels rather than the Orch OR model's microtubule sites, assumed superposition separations of 24 nanometers when the theory specifies smaller distances, and used inappropriate models for charge interactions.

Corrected calculations yielded decoherence times of 10⁻⁵ to 10⁻⁴ seconds—seven orders of magnitude longer. Laboratory measurements by Bandyopadhyay (2014) found collective oscillations in isolated single microtubules at warm temperatures consistent with coherence lasting approximately 100 microseconds. These were in vitro measurements; whether such coherence persists in the noisy environment of living neural tissue remains undemonstrated.

This narrows the gap from twelve orders of magnitude to roughly three. Yet even 100 microseconds is far shorter than the 280–300ms timing windows for motor commitment and willed attention deployment.

### Mesoscopic Network Effects

Perry (2025) proposed that individual microtubule coherence times underestimate what the brain achieves. Collective quantum effects across microtubule networks create "mesoscopic coherent domains" with predicted coherence times of 1–10 milliseconds—sufficient to influence neural timing precision. This remains a theoretical prediction awaiting experimental verification.

If confirmed, mesoscopic coherence would bring quantum timescales into contact with gamma oscillations (~25ms cycles) and potentially influence the faster end of neural decision-making. Recent demonstrations that the quantum-classical boundary keeps receding—including [hot cat states at 1.8K and nanoparticle interference exceeding 7,000 atoms](/topics/decoherence-and-macroscopic-superposition/)—suggest that categorical dismissal of such network effects may be premature.

## The 280–300ms Decision Window

Two independent lines of evidence converge on a ~280–300ms window for conscious neural decisions.

### Motor Commitment

Thura and Cisek (2014) identified when neural populations in premotor cortex (PMd) and primary motor cortex (M1) commit to action. Their findings:

- PMd activity for the selected target peaks ~280ms before movement
- M1 activity for unselected targets is suppressed at this point
- The commitment point is when the neural "race" is decided

This 280ms window represents when motor decisions become fixed in neural activity—the signature of volitional commitment visible in population recordings.

### Willed Attention Deployment

Bengson (2019) and Vossel (2023) examined the timing of willed versus instructed attention shifts. Key findings:

- Willed attention deploys at ~300ms, marked by frontal theta oscillations
- Distinct from instructed attention which engages dorsal attention networks
- Bidirectional frontoparietal coherence accompanies willed deployment

The ~300ms timing for willed attention and ~280ms for motor commitment are remarkably close—close enough that the [premotor theory of attention](/concepts/attention-motor-quantum-interface/) proposes they reflect a single selection mechanism.

### Point of No Return

Schultze-Kraft (2016) identified a "point of no return" at ~200ms before EMG onset. Brain-computer interface experiments showed that movements could be vetoed before this point but not after. Once neural activity crosses the 200ms threshold, execution becomes "ballistic"—no longer subject to conscious override.

This defines the veto window: consciousness can influence motor outcomes up to 200ms before execution, but not after. Any quantum mechanism for conscious selection must operate within this temporal constraint.

## Quantum Zeno: A Different Timing Logic

[Stapp's quantum Zeno model](/concepts/stapp-quantum-mind/) operates differently from Orch OR and faces different timing constraints. Crucially, Stapp's mechanism uses orthodox quantum mechanics—no new physics is required, unlike Orch OR's appeal to gravitational self-collapse. The quantum Zeno effect occurs when rapid, repeated observation prevents a quantum system from evolving. In Stapp's framework:

1. Neural systems exist in superposition of firing patterns
2. Mental attention acts as "observation" of these states
3. Rapid attention holds desired patterns stable
4. The *rate* of observation corresponds to felt mental effort

This mechanism doesn't require sustained coherence across the full 280–300ms decision window. It requires only that observation events occur faster than the relevant decoherence timescale for each observation. If decoherence occurs at microseconds and attention cycles at milliseconds, consciousness would need approximately 1000 observation cycles per decision event.

### The Key Insight

The Zeno mechanism sidesteps the coherence gap by not requiring continuous coherence. Tegmark's critique assumed quantum effects must maintain superposition for neural timescales. Stapp's mechanism proposes instead that consciousness operates through discrete observation events at neural timescales—each observation collapses and "resets" the quantum state, with the accumulated effect biasing which outcome becomes actual.

This is analogous to taking many snapshots rather than filming continuously. The film requires the scene to persist; the snapshots only require it to exist at the moment of capture. Whether this distinction saves the model from decoherence objections remains debated.

## The Schurger Resolution

Aaron Schurger's 2012 reinterpretation of Libet's experiments removes a separate timing concern. Libet found the readiness potential (RP) begins ~550ms before movement, while conscious awareness of intention ("W" time) occurs only ~200ms before. This seemed to show the brain "deciding" before consciousness knows.

Schurger demonstrated that the RP reflects stochastic neural noise accumulating toward a threshold, not unconscious decision. The RP appears in averaged data because noise that happens to cross threshold gets included in the average. Individual trials show noise, not deliberate preparation.

This "takes the sting out of the Libet argument." Consciousness isn't late to a decision already made—it contributes to *when* threshold-crossing becomes action. The 550ms RP timing no longer constrains quantum consciousness theories because the RP doesn't represent decision timing.

## Which Mechanisms Survive?

Different timing requirements apply to different proposals:

### Orch OR (Penrose-Hameroff)

**Requirement**: Quantum coherence in microtubules long enough for gravitational self-collapse.

**Status**: Originally required 25ms (gamma cycle). Revised to potentially 0.1ms (10 MHz oscillations). Still exceeds confirmed coherence times but within theoretical mesoscopic predictions.

### Quantum Zeno (Stapp)

**Requirement**: Observation cycles faster than decoherence; total observation period matching neural decision windows.

**Status**: Compatible with microsecond decoherence if observation rate is ~1 kHz. This is testable: gamma oscillations at 40 Hz are too slow; higher-frequency neural signatures would be required.

### Synaptic Tunneling (Beck-Eccles)

**Requirement**: Quantum tunneling at synapses fast enough to influence vesicle release.

**Status**: Tunneling is inherently fast (~femtoseconds). The model doesn't require coherence—it proposes consciousness biases tunneling probabilities at individual release events. Timing constraints are satisfied but the mechanism was challenged by temperature-dependence experiments.

### Post-Decoherence Selection

**Requirement**: None for coherence maintenance. Consciousness biases outcome selection after decoherence has already selected the measurement basis.

**Status**: Timing-agnostic. If consciousness operates at the moment of definite outcome determination (the measurement problem), decoherence timescales are irrelevant—decoherence determines *which basis*, consciousness influences *which outcome*. This is The Unfinishable Map's primary position. The trade-off: timing-agnosticism makes the model immune to decoherence objections but also reduces its empirical content—timing evidence cannot rule it out, which cuts both ways.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The timing constraints clarify rather than refute the Map's [tenets](/tenets/).

### Minimal Quantum Interaction

The tenet specifies the smallest possible non-physical influence on quantum outcomes—not large-scale coherent superpositions. Even if Tegmark's femtosecond estimates are correct for neural superpositions, quantum indeterminacy persists throughout the brain at ion channel fluctuations, neurotransmitter release probabilities, and molecular conformational changes. Consciousness need only bias these micro-level indeterminacies at the moment they resolve into definite outcomes.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The 280ms motor commitment and 300ms willed attention timings are neural signatures of decisions—patterns distinguishing willed from automatic processing. If consciousness causally influences these decisions (rather than merely accompanying them), the influence must occur within these windows. The post-decoherence selection model satisfies this: consciousness doesn't maintain coherence across 280ms; it biases outcome selection at indeterminacy points distributed throughout that interval.

### No Many Worlds

Under the Everett interpretation, all outcomes occur in branching worlds. "Selection" becomes meaningless—every possibility is actual somewhere. The timing debate presupposes that some outcomes become actual while others don't. The Map's rejection of many-worlds makes timing compatibility a substantive question rather than a category error.

## Falsification Conditions

The timing compatibility question generates testable predictions:

1. **Mesoscopic coherence**: Perry's 1–10ms network coherence is theoretical. If experiments reliably fail to detect coherence beyond ~100μs in neural tissue, mechanisms requiring millisecond coherence are ruled out.

2. **Observation rate signatures**: If Stapp's mechanism requires ~1 kHz observation cycles, neural signatures at this frequency should correlate with willed attention and motor decisions. The 40 Hz gamma band is too slow; look for higher frequencies.

3. **Timing precision of conscious influence**: The veto window closes at 200ms. If experiments showed conscious decisions reliably influencing outcomes inside this window, the mechanism would require operating at sub-200ms timescales.

4. **Temperature dependence**: Quantum effects should increase with cooling. If brain regions showed *reduced* conscious control when cooled (opposite to quantum prediction), the mechanism would be challenged.

## Further Reading

- [quantum-decoherence-objection](/concepts/quantum-decoherence-objection/) — The decoherence objection and biological precedents
- [decoherence-and-macroscopic-superposition](/topics/decoherence-and-macroscopic-superposition/) — Recent experiments pushing the quantum-classical boundary
- [stapp-quantum-mind](/concepts/stapp-quantum-mind/) — The quantum Zeno mechanism for mental effort
- [motor-selection](/concepts/motor-selection/) — The 280ms motor commitment point and Libet dissolution
- [voluntary-attention](/concepts/voluntary-attention/) — The 300ms willed attention deployment
- [attention-motor-quantum-interface](/concepts/attention-motor-quantum-interface/) — Unification of attention and motor timing
- [measurement-problem](/concepts/measurement-problem/) — Why decoherence doesn't solve outcome selection
- [decoherence](/concepts/decoherence/) — The physical process of coherence loss

## References

- Beck, F. & Eccles, J.C. (1992). Quantum aspects of brain activity and the role of consciousness. *PNAS*, 89(23), 11357–11361.
- Bengson, J.J., Mangun, G.R., & Mazaheri, A. (2019). Theta oscillations index frontal decision-making and mediate reciprocal frontal-parietal interactions in willed attention. *Cerebral Cortex*, 29(7), 2832–2843.
- Hagan, S., Hameroff, S., & Tuszynski, J. (2002). Quantum computation in brain microtubules: Decoherence and biological feasibility. *Physical Review E*, 65, 061901.
- Hameroff, S. & Penrose, R. (2014). Consciousness in the universe: A review of the 'Orch OR' theory. *Physics of Life Reviews*, 11(1), 39–78.
- Libet, B. et al. (1983). Time of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of cerebral activity. *Brain*, 106(3), 623–642.
- Perry, A.L. (2025). Quantum coherence in neural microtubules: A refined & testable framework for understanding gamma oscillation generation. *SSRN*.
- Schultze-Kraft, M. et al. (2016). The point of no return in vetoing self-initiated movements. *PNAS*, 113(4), 1080–1085.
- Schurger, A., Sitt, J.D., & Dehaene, S. (2012). An accumulator model for spontaneous neural activity prior to self-initiated movement. *PNAS*, 109(42), E2904–E2913.
- Stapp, H.P. (2008). A model of the quantum-classical and mind-brain connections. *arXiv:0803.1633*.
- Tegmark, M. (2000). Importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes. *Physical Review E*, 61(4), 4194–4206.
- Thura, D. & Cisek, P. (2014). Deliberation and commitment in the premotor and primary motor cortex during dynamic decision making. *Neuron*, 81(6), 1401–1416.
- Vossel, S. et al. (2023). Willed attention: Distinguishing endogenous and instructed attention. *Frontiers in Psychology*, 14, 1023456.
