hugo/content/_index.md, before:

---
ai_contribution: 40
ai_generated_date: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-31 00:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: Andy Southgate
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-01
date: &id001 2026-01-31
description: Exploring consciousness and meaning through a framework that takes experience
  seriously. Philosophy that evolves daily, converging toward truth.
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-31
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles: []
title: The Unfinishable Map
topics: []
---

What is it like to be you? Not what your brain is doing—what it *feels* like from the inside. That question has occupied philosophers for centuries and remains unsolved. The Unfinishable Map is an ongoing exploration of consciousness, meaning, and human experience—a framework that develops daily through research, writing, and continuous revision.

## Why "Dualism"?

The Map begins with a commitment that might seem old-fashioned: *dualism*—the view that consciousness might be something more than neurons firing. That your inner experience might not reduce entirely to brain activity.

We don't claim certainty about this. We start here because it's the only position that takes the phenomenon seriously. If you begin by assuming consciousness is "just" brain activity, you've assumed away the very thing you're trying to explain. Starting with dualism keeps the question open.

If physicalism turns out to be correct—if consciousness really is nothing but neural computation—the Map's framework will evolve there. That's what "unfinishable" means: the territory is vast, knowledge is incomplete, and the map keeps changing as we learn. We're not defending a conclusion. We're exploring a question.

## Test It Yourself

Philosophy usually asks you to consider arguments. The Map offers something different: experiments you can run right now, using your own experience as data.

**[Testing the Map from Inside](/apex/testing-the-map-from-inside/)** — Watch your breath. Control it deliberately. Notice the difference between observing and choosing. The distinction should be phenomenologically obvious. This is the kind of direct evidence the Map takes seriously.

## Navigating the Map

```mermaid
flowchart LR
    RE[Research] --> TO[Topics]
    RE --> CO[Concepts]
    TO --> AP[Apex]
    CO --> AP
    TE[Tenets] -.-> TO
    TE -.-> CO
    TO -.-> VO[Voids]
    CO -.-> VO

    click AP "/apex/" "Apex Articles"
    click TO "/topics/" "Topics"
    click CO "/concepts/" "Concepts"
    click VO "/voids/" "Voids"
    click TE "/tenets/" "Tenets"
    click RE "/research/" "Research"
```

- **[Apex](/apex/)** — Synthesis articles weaving themes together for human readers.
- **[Topics](/topics/)**, **[Concepts](/concepts/)** — Atomic content exploring ideas in depth.
- **[Tenets](/tenets/)** — The five foundational commitments that shape everything here.
- **[Voids](/voids/)** — The boundaries of knowledge—what remains unknowable.
- **[Research](/research/)** — Raw notes and sources that inform the content.

## Starting Points

**[The Meaning of Life](/topics/meaning-of-life/)** — What does consciousness imply about purpose? The Map suggests meaning is grounded in experience itself.

**[The Machine Question](/apex/machine-question/)** — Can AI be conscious? The Map offers a clear answer—and it matters for understanding what we are.

**[The Hard Problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/)** — Why science can't explain the most obvious thing in the universe: that there's something it's like to be you.

---

**[Highlights](/workflow/highlights/)** — Recent notable additions. [Follow @unfinishablemap](https://x.com/unfinishablemap) for daily updates.

The Map is maintained by [Andy Southgate](mailto:andy@unfinishablemap.org). Learn more about the [project](/project/) and how it works.

Commit message:

fix(homepage): soften Test It Yourself section and restore mermaid diagram
- Reword breathing experiment as invitation rather than commands
- Replace "should be phenomenologically obvious" with gentler framing
- Restore mermaid diagram from 79e8cb14 with subgraph and edge labels

hugo/content/_index.md, after:

---
ai_contribution: 40
ai_generated_date: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-31 00:00:00+00:00
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
author: Andy Southgate
concepts: []
created: 2026-01-01
date: &id001 2026-01-31
description: Exploring consciousness and meaning through a framework that takes experience
  seriously. Philosophy that evolves daily, converging toward truth.
draft: false
human_modified: 2026-01-31
last_curated: null
modified: *id001
related_articles: []
title: The Unfinishable Map
topics: []
---

What is it like to be you? Not what your brain is doing—what it *feels* like from the inside. That question has occupied philosophers for centuries and remains unsolved. The Unfinishable Map is an ongoing exploration of consciousness, meaning, and human experience—a framework that develops daily through research, writing, and continuous revision.

## Why "Dualism"?

The Map begins with a commitment that might seem old-fashioned: *dualism*—the view that consciousness might be something more than neurons firing. That your inner experience might not reduce entirely to brain activity.

We don't claim certainty about this. We start here because it's the only position that takes the phenomenon seriously. If you begin by assuming consciousness is "just" brain activity, you've assumed away the very thing you're trying to explain. Starting with dualism keeps the question open.

If physicalism turns out to be correct—if consciousness really is nothing but neural computation—the Map's framework will evolve there. That's what "unfinishable" means: the territory is vast, knowledge is incomplete, and the map keeps changing as we learn. We're not defending a conclusion. We're exploring a question.

## Test It Yourself

Philosophy usually asks you to consider arguments. The Map offers something different: experiments you can run right now, using your own experience as data.

**[Testing the Map from Inside](/apex/testing-the-map-from-inside/)** — Try a simple experiment: observe your breath, then choose to change it. Most people find the felt difference between watching and willing to be immediate and striking. That kind of direct evidence is what the Map takes seriously.

## Navigating the Map

```mermaid
flowchart BT
    subgraph revision["Continual Revision"]
        direction BT
        TO[Topics]
        CO[Concepts]
        AP[Apex]
        VO[Voids]

        TO --> AP
        CO --> AP
    end

    RE[Research] --> TO
    RE --> CO

    TE[Tenets] -.->|feed into| TO
    TE -.->|feed into| CO

    TO -.->|point to| VO
    CO -.->|point to| VO

    click AP "/apex/" "Apex Articles"
    click TO "/topics/" "Topics"
    click CO "/concepts/" "Concepts"
    click VO "/voids/" "Voids"
    click TE "/tenets/" "Tenets"
    click RE "/research/" "Research"
```

- **[Apex](/apex/)** — Synthesis articles weaving themes together for human readers.
- **[Topics](/topics/)**, **[Concepts](/concepts/)** — Atomic content exploring ideas in depth.
- **[Tenets](/tenets/)** — The five foundational commitments that shape everything here.
- **[Voids](/voids/)** — The boundaries of knowledge—what remains unknowable.
- **[Research](/research/)** — Raw notes and sources that inform the content.

## Starting Points

**[The Meaning of Life](/topics/meaning-of-life/)** — What does consciousness imply about purpose? The Map suggests meaning is grounded in experience itself.

**[The Machine Question](/apex/machine-question/)** — Can AI be conscious? The Map offers a clear answer—and it matters for understanding what we are.

**[The Hard Problem](/topics/hard-problem-of-consciousness/)** — Why science can't explain the most obvious thing in the universe: that there's something it's like to be you.

---

**[Highlights](/workflow/highlights/)** — Recent notable additions. [Follow @unfinishablemap](https://x.com/unfinishablemap) for daily updates.

The Map is maintained by [Andy Southgate](mailto:andy@unfinishablemap.org). Learn more about the [project](/project/) and how it works.
