obsidian/research/higher-order-theories-consciousness-2026-01-14.md, before:

---
title: Research Notes - Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-14T23:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[ai-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[self-reference-paradox]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
---

# Research: Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness

**Date**: 2026-01-14
**Search queries used**: "higher-order theories consciousness Rosenthal Brown 2025", "site:plato.stanford.edu higher-order theories consciousness", "higher-order thought theory criticism Ned Block animal consciousness", "higher-order theory consciousness dualism physicalism hard problem"

## Executive Summary

Higher-order theories (HOT) of consciousness hold that a mental state becomes conscious when it is represented by a higher-order mental state—either a thought (HOT theory, Rosenthal) or a perception (HOP theory, Armstrong, Lycan). The central claim is that being aware of a mental state is what makes it conscious. While empirically influential and linking consciousness to metacognition and prefrontal cortex activity, HOT faces serious philosophical objections: the "rock" objection (why does thinking about something make it conscious?), the misrepresentation problem (what happens when HOTs target nonexistent states?), concerns about animal and infant consciousness (they likely lack metacognitive sophistication), and most fundamentally, Block and Farrell's arguments that HOT explains only *access* consciousness, not phenomenal consciousness (what-it-is-like-ness). From the site's perspective, HOT is a functionalist theory that fails to address the hard problem—explaining cognitive architecture without explaining why there is something it is like to be conscious.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness"
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness-higher/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - HOT: "a state that is actually causing an activated thought...that I have M, and causing it non-inferentially"
  - HOP: inner senses producing "equally fine-grained, but higher-order, representations"
  - Rosenthal allows targetless HOTs—consciousness without first-order state
  - "Why should thinking about my perception of the rock make the latter phenomenally conscious?"
- **Tenet alignment**: Conflicts with Dualism—HOT is functionalist/physicalist
- **Quote**: "We can easily conceive of creatures...who are wholly lacking in phenomenal consciousness" despite having the right higher-order representations.

### Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy - "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness"
- **URL**: https://iep.utm.edu/higher-order-theories-of-consciousness/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - HOT theory is "unlike reductionist accounts in non-mentalistic terms"
  - Gennaro argues real problem is "concept acquisition" not consciousness
  - Rock objection: if thinking about a rock doesn't make it conscious, why mental states?
  - Lycan has retreated from HOP, now favors attention-based accounts
- **Tenet alignment**: HOT claims mental-level reduction, not neural—potentially more compatible with site's framework than GWT, but still functionalist
- **Quote**: "How or why does a mental state come to have a first-person qualitative 'what it is like' aspect by virtue of the presence of a HOR directed at it?"

### PMC - "Higher-order theories and what-it-is-like-ness" (Farrell 2018)
- **URL**: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6190903/
- **Type**: Philosophy paper
- **Key points**:
  - Distinguishes Transitivity Principle (TP) from Nagelian Definition (ND)
  - "Ambitious" HOT fails to explain what-it-is-like-ness
  - Misrepresentation argument shows HOT conflates phenomenal and access consciousness
  - HOT theorists adopt non-standard semantic readings to escape objections
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports site's position—HOT doesn't solve hard problem
- **Quote**: "Ambitious HO theories of consciousness fail."

### PhilPapers - Block "The Higher-Order Approach to Consciousness is Defunct" (2011)
- **URL**: https://philpapers.org/rec/BLOTHO-3
- **Type**: Philosophy paper
- **Key points**:
  - Block argues HOT theory has "a version [of an objection] which is fatal"
  - Distinguishes phenomenal from access consciousness
  - Phenomenal consciousness may overflow access—more experience than can be accessed
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports site's distinction between phenomenal and access
- **Quote**: "The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct."

### Springer - "HOTT and heavy: higher-order thought theory and animal consciousness" (2024)
- **URL**: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-024-04529-8
- **Type**: Academic paper
- **Key points**:
  - Defends HOTT for animal consciousness
  - Argues many nonhuman animals may possess relevant HOTs
  - Addresses common objection that animals lack metacognitive capacity
- **Tenet alignment**: Neutral—empirical question about animal cognition
- **Quote**: "Many nonhuman animals possess the relevant HOTs necessary for consciousness."

## Major Positions

### Higher-Order Thought (HOT) Theory (Rosenthal)
- **Proponents**: David Rosenthal, Rocco Gennaro
- **Core claim**: A mental state M is conscious iff there is a non-inferential thought that one is in M
- **Key arguments**:
  - Explains difference between conscious and unconscious states
  - Targetless HOTs: consciousness can occur even without first-order state
  - Introspection involves *conscious* HOTs; ordinary consciousness involves *unconscious* HOTs
  - Links consciousness to prefrontal cortex activity
- **Relation to site tenets**: HOT is functionalist—consciousness is a functional role (being the target of higher-order thought). Conflicts with Dualism's claim that consciousness is irreducible. However, HOT is reduction *in mentalistic terms*, not directly to neurons—more sophisticated than crude physicalism.

### Higher-Order Perception (HOP) Theory (Armstrong, Lycan)
- **Proponents**: D.M. Armstrong, William Lycan (formerly)
- **Core claim**: Consciousness involves "inner sense" that perceives first-order states
- **Key arguments**:
  - Perceptual model captures passive, receptive character of consciousness
  - Analogous to external perception—inner sense monitors mental states
  - More naturalistic than thought-based account
- **Relation to site tenets**: Like HOT, this is functionalist. Lycan has since retreated from the view, now favoring attention-based accounts. The inner sense model doesn't explain why inner perception produces phenomenal consciousness any more than HOT.

### Block's Critique
- **Proponents**: Ned Block
- **Core claim**: HOT theory conflates phenomenal and access consciousness
- **Key arguments**:
  - Phenomenal consciousness (what-it-is-like-ness) is distinct from access consciousness (global availability)
  - Consciousness may "overflow" access—we experience more than we can report
  - HOT explains access, not phenomenal consciousness
  - "Defunct" paper argues HOT faces fatal objection
- **Relation to site tenets**: Block's distinction strongly supports site's framework. If phenomenal consciousness exceeds what HOT can explain, then consciousness is not reducible to higher-order representations.

## Key Debates

### HOT vs. First-Order Theories
- **Sides**: Rosenthal, Gennaro vs. Dretske, Tye
- **Core disagreement**: Do we need higher-order states to explain consciousness, or can first-order representations suffice?
- **Current state**: First-order theorists argue consciousness can be explained by contents available to reasoning/action. HOT theorists argue this can't explain the conscious/unconscious distinction (blindsight, implicit perception).

### The Rock Objection
- **Sides**: Critics vs. HOT defenders
- **Core disagreement**: Why should having a thought about a mental state make it conscious, when having a thought about a rock doesn't make the rock conscious?
- **Current state**: HOT defenders respond that rocks aren't mental states—HOT specifically explains what makes *mental states* conscious. Critics find this unsatisfying as it doesn't explain the mechanism.

### Animal and Infant Consciousness
- **Sides**: Block, Dretske (skeptical of HOT) vs. Gennaro, recent defenders
- **Core disagreement**: Animals and infants likely lack sophisticated metacognitive capacities but seem clearly conscious. Does this refute HOT?
- **Current state**: Recent defenders (2024 Synthese paper) argue animals may have the relevant HOTs. Others argue this stretches "thought" beyond recognition.

### Misrepresentation Problem
- **Sides**: Critics vs. Rosenthal, Brown
- **Core disagreement**: If a HOT misrepresents (targets nonexistent state), is the subject conscious?
- **Current state**: Rosenthal accepts consciousness can occur with targetless HOTs. Brown's HOROR theory (higher-order representation of representation) may avoid the problem. Critics argue this divorces HOT from what it was supposed to explain.

## Historical Timeline

| Year | Event/Publication | Significance |
|------|-------------------|--------------|
| 1968 | Armstrong "A Materialist Theory of the Mind" | Early HOP theory via inner sense |
| 1986 | Rosenthal "Two Concepts of Consciousness" | Foundational HOT theory paper |
| 1996 | Lycan "Consciousness and Experience" | Major defense of HOP |
| 2002 | Rosenthal "How Many Kinds of Consciousness?" | Develops HOT framework |
| 2005 | Rosenthal "Consciousness and Mind" | Comprehensive statement of HOT |
| 2011 | Block "The Higher Order Approach is Defunct" | Major critique |
| 2012 | Gennaro "The Consciousness Paradox" | Defends HOT against animal objection |
| 2018 | Farrell "Higher-order theories and what-it-is-like-ness" | Argues HOT fails for phenomenal consciousness |
| 2024 | "HOTT and heavy" in Synthese | Defends HOT for animal consciousness |
| 2025 | Brown "Consciousness as Representing One's Mind" | Latest systematic defense |

## HOT and AI Consciousness

### Implications for Machine Consciousness

HOT theory has direct implications for AI:

1. **Metacognition as indicator**: If consciousness requires higher-order representations, then AI systems with metacognitive capacities are candidates for consciousness
2. **2023 report on AI consciousness**: Lists HOT as one of several theories generating "indicator properties" for assessing AI consciousness
3. **Computational implementation**: HOT specifies functional role (having thoughts about thoughts) that could in principle be computationally implemented
4. **Recent experiments**: Researchers have created synthetic agents implementing HOT mechanisms, finding "Self-Model lesion abolished metacognitive calibration while preserving first-order task performance"—consistent with HOT predictions

### Site's Response

HOT's AI implications reveal the same problem as with GWT:
- HOT is functionalist—if consciousness IS having higher-order representations, then AI with such representations would be conscious
- Site's [[functionalism|rejection of functionalism]] blocks this inference
- The absent qualia objection applies: a system could have higher-order representations without phenomenal consciousness
- [[ai-consciousness|Site's AI consciousness skepticism]] holds that computational metacognition is not sufficient for genuine consciousness

## Relation to Site's Self-Reference Paradox

Interestingly, HOT connects to the site's [[self-reference-paradox]] concept:

- HOT requires consciousness to involve *self-reference*—being aware of one's own mental states
- This creates potential regress: if conscious HOTs require even higher-order states, where does it end?
- HOT's answer (unconscious HOTs for ordinary consciousness, conscious HOTs only for introspection) may not resolve the deeper puzzle
- The calibration problem from self-reference-paradox applies: how can we evaluate our metacognition without using more metacognition?

## Relation to Site Tenets

### Dualism Tenet

**Conflict**: HOT is a functionalist theory. It identifies phenomenal consciousness with a functional property (being the target of higher-order thought). This is a form of mental-level reduction that conflicts with irreducibility.

**However**: HOT defenders argue it's reduction "in mentalistic terms, not neurophysiology." This is more sophisticated than crude type-identity physicalism. But the site's Dualism tenet rejects any reduction of phenomenal consciousness—whether to neurons or to cognitive functions.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction Tenet

**Orthogonal**: HOT operates at the cognitive level and doesn't invoke quantum mechanics. If HOT were true, quantum effects would be irrelevant to consciousness—it would be a purely classical computational/cognitive phenomenon. This conflicts with site's proposal that consciousness interfaces with physics at quantum indeterminacies.

### Bidirectional Interaction Tenet

**Potential Conflict**: HOT is typically read as bottom-up: first-order states generate higher-order representations through cognitive mechanisms. Site's framework holds consciousness *selects* among physical states. These could be compatible if consciousness biases which HOTs occur, but HOT proponents don't typically frame it this way.

**The self-stultification argument applies**: If HOT is true and consciousness is "just" having higher-order thoughts, then the thoughts claiming HOT is true were caused by the same cognitive mechanisms that produce any thought—there's no privileged access to truth. Site's epiphenomenalism critique (from [[epiphenomenalism]]) applies similarly to HOT.

### No Many Worlds Tenet

**Neutral**: HOT doesn't address quantum interpretation.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits Tenet

**Relevant**: HOT appears simpler than dualism—it explains consciousness in terms of cognitive architecture without positing irreducible properties. But the site responds: HOT explains access consciousness, not phenomenal consciousness. The apparent simplicity is achieved by ignoring what needs to be explained. As Farrell argues, "Ambitious HO theories of consciousness fail" to account for what-it-is-like-ness.

## Potential Article Angles

Based on this research, an article could:

1. **Present HOT as major rival theory** - Fair treatment of HOT, its empirical predictions, and connection to prefrontal cortex research. Acknowledge it as influential while arguing it addresses only access consciousness.

2. **Use HOT to sharpen the access/phenomenal distinction** - HOT makes the Block distinction vivid. Even if HOT fully explains *access* (which states are available for report), the question remains why there's something it's like to have those states.

3. **Connect to self-reference paradox** - HOT requires self-reference. The regress problem and the calibration problem from the site's voids framework apply. How do we evaluate our metacognition without metacognition?

4. **Compare with GWT** - Both are leading functionalist theories. GWT emphasizes broadcasting; HOT emphasizes metacognition. Both face the same fundamental objection: they explain cognitive architecture, not phenomenal consciousness.

When writing the article, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions—focus on site's distinctive critique of functionalism
- Tenet alignment requirements—explicit section connecting to site framework
- LLM optimization—front-load the key claim that HOT addresses access not phenomenal consciousness

## Gaps in Research

- Detailed treatment of Brown's 2025 book and HOROR theory
- More on the neural evidence for prefrontal involvement
- Comparison with attention schema theory (Graziano)—another metacognitive approach
- Gennaro's responses to Farrell's critique

## Key Quotes for Article

On the fundamental question:
> "How or why does a mental state come to have a first-person qualitative 'what it is like' aspect by virtue of the presence of a HOR directed at it?" — IEP

On Block's critique:
> "The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct." — Block (2011)

On phenomenal vs. access:
> "Ambitious HO theories of consciousness fail." — Farrell (2018)

On the rock objection:
> "Why should thinking about my perception of the rock make the latter phenomenally conscious?" — SEP

## Citations

1. Rosenthal, D. M. (2005). *Consciousness and Mind*. Oxford University Press.

2. Block, N. (2011). The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct. *Analysis*, 71(3), 419-431.

3. Farrell, J. (2018). Higher-order theories of consciousness and what-it-is-like-ness. *Philosophical Psychology*, 31(8), 1183-1206. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6190903/

4. Gennaro, R. J. (2012). *The Consciousness Paradox*. MIT Press.

5. Brown, R. (2025). *Consciousness as Representing One's Mind: The Higher-Order Approach to Consciousness Explained*. Oxford University Press.

6. Lycan, W. G. (1996). *Consciousness and Experience*. MIT Press.

7. Armstrong, D. M. (1968). *A Materialist Theory of the Mind*. Routledge.

8. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness-higher/

9. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness." https://iep.utm.edu/higher-order-theories-of-consciousness/

10. Butlin, P. et al. (2023). Consciousness in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Science of Consciousness. arXiv:2308.08708.

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

obsidian/research/higher-order-theories-consciousness-2026-01-14.md, after:

---
title: Research Notes - Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-14
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-14T23:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[ai-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[functionalism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[self-reference-paradox]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[tenets]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
---

# Research: Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness

**Date**: 2026-01-14
**Search queries used**: "higher-order theories consciousness Rosenthal Brown 2025", "site:plato.stanford.edu higher-order theories consciousness", "higher-order thought theory criticism Ned Block animal consciousness", "higher-order theory consciousness dualism physicalism hard problem"

## Executive Summary

Higher-order theories (HOT) of consciousness hold that a mental state becomes conscious when it is represented by a higher-order mental state—either a thought (HOT theory, Rosenthal) or a perception (HOP theory, Armstrong, Lycan). The central claim is that being aware of a mental state is what makes it conscious. While empirically influential and linking consciousness to metacognition and prefrontal cortex activity, HOT faces serious philosophical objections: the "rock" objection (why does thinking about something make it conscious?), the misrepresentation problem (what happens when HOTs target nonexistent states?), concerns about animal and infant consciousness (they likely lack metacognitive sophistication), and most fundamentally, Block and Farrell's arguments that HOT explains only *access* consciousness, not phenomenal consciousness (what-it-is-like-ness). From the project's perspective, HOT is a functionalist theory that fails to address the hard problem—explaining cognitive architecture without explaining why there is something it is like to be conscious.

## Key Sources

### Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy - "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness"
- **URL**: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness-higher/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - HOT: "a state that is actually causing an activated thought...that I have M, and causing it non-inferentially"
  - HOP: inner senses producing "equally fine-grained, but higher-order, representations"
  - Rosenthal allows targetless HOTs—consciousness without first-order state
  - "Why should thinking about my perception of the rock make the latter phenomenally conscious?"
- **Tenet alignment**: Conflicts with Dualism—HOT is functionalist/physicalist
- **Quote**: "We can easily conceive of creatures...who are wholly lacking in phenomenal consciousness" despite having the right higher-order representations.

### Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy - "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness"
- **URL**: https://iep.utm.edu/higher-order-theories-of-consciousness/
- **Type**: Encyclopedia
- **Key points**:
  - HOT theory is "unlike reductionist accounts in non-mentalistic terms"
  - Gennaro argues real problem is "concept acquisition" not consciousness
  - Rock objection: if thinking about a rock doesn't make it conscious, why mental states?
  - Lycan has retreated from HOP, now favors attention-based accounts
- **Tenet alignment**: HOT claims mental-level reduction, not neural—potentially more compatible with site's framework than GWT, but still functionalist
- **Quote**: "How or why does a mental state come to have a first-person qualitative 'what it is like' aspect by virtue of the presence of a HOR directed at it?"

### PMC - "Higher-order theories and what-it-is-like-ness" (Farrell 2018)
- **URL**: https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6190903/
- **Type**: Philosophy paper
- **Key points**:
  - Distinguishes Transitivity Principle (TP) from Nagelian Definition (ND)
  - "Ambitious" HOT fails to explain what-it-is-like-ness
  - Misrepresentation argument shows HOT conflates phenomenal and access consciousness
  - HOT theorists adopt non-standard semantic readings to escape objections
- **Tenet alignment**: Strongly supports site's position—HOT doesn't solve hard problem
- **Quote**: "Ambitious HO theories of consciousness fail."

### PhilPapers - Block "The Higher-Order Approach to Consciousness is Defunct" (2011)
- **URL**: https://philpapers.org/rec/BLOTHO-3
- **Type**: Philosophy paper
- **Key points**:
  - Block argues HOT theory has "a version [of an objection] which is fatal"
  - Distinguishes phenomenal from access consciousness
  - Phenomenal consciousness may overflow access—more experience than can be accessed
- **Tenet alignment**: Supports site's distinction between phenomenal and access
- **Quote**: "The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct."

### Springer - "HOTT and heavy: higher-order thought theory and animal consciousness" (2024)
- **URL**: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11229-024-04529-8
- **Type**: Academic paper
- **Key points**:
  - Defends HOTT for animal consciousness
  - Argues many nonhuman animals may possess relevant HOTs
  - Addresses common objection that animals lack metacognitive capacity
- **Tenet alignment**: Neutral—empirical question about animal cognition
- **Quote**: "Many nonhuman animals possess the relevant HOTs necessary for consciousness."

## Major Positions

### Higher-Order Thought (HOT) Theory (Rosenthal)
- **Proponents**: David Rosenthal, Rocco Gennaro
- **Core claim**: A mental state M is conscious iff there is a non-inferential thought that one is in M
- **Key arguments**:
  - Explains difference between conscious and unconscious states
  - Targetless HOTs: consciousness can occur even without first-order state
  - Introspection involves *conscious* HOTs; ordinary consciousness involves *unconscious* HOTs
  - Links consciousness to prefrontal cortex activity
- **Relation to site tenets**: HOT is functionalist—consciousness is a functional role (being the target of higher-order thought). Conflicts with Dualism's claim that consciousness is irreducible. However, HOT is reduction *in mentalistic terms*, not directly to neurons—more sophisticated than crude physicalism.

### Higher-Order Perception (HOP) Theory (Armstrong, Lycan)
- **Proponents**: D.M. Armstrong, William Lycan (formerly)
- **Core claim**: Consciousness involves "inner sense" that perceives first-order states
- **Key arguments**:
  - Perceptual model captures passive, receptive character of consciousness
  - Analogous to external perception—inner sense monitors mental states
  - More naturalistic than thought-based account
- **Relation to site tenets**: Like HOT, this is functionalist. Lycan has since retreated from the view, now favoring attention-based accounts. The inner sense model doesn't explain why inner perception produces phenomenal consciousness any more than HOT.

### Block's Critique
- **Proponents**: Ned Block
- **Core claim**: HOT theory conflates phenomenal and access consciousness
- **Key arguments**:
  - Phenomenal consciousness (what-it-is-like-ness) is distinct from access consciousness (global availability)
  - Consciousness may "overflow" access—we experience more than we can report
  - HOT explains access, not phenomenal consciousness
  - "Defunct" paper argues HOT faces fatal objection
- **Relation to site tenets**: Block's distinction strongly supports site's framework. If phenomenal consciousness exceeds what HOT can explain, then consciousness is not reducible to higher-order representations.

## Key Debates

### HOT vs. First-Order Theories
- **Sides**: Rosenthal, Gennaro vs. Dretske, Tye
- **Core disagreement**: Do we need higher-order states to explain consciousness, or can first-order representations suffice?
- **Current state**: First-order theorists argue consciousness can be explained by contents available to reasoning/action. HOT theorists argue this can't explain the conscious/unconscious distinction (blindsight, implicit perception).

### The Rock Objection
- **Sides**: Critics vs. HOT defenders
- **Core disagreement**: Why should having a thought about a mental state make it conscious, when having a thought about a rock doesn't make the rock conscious?
- **Current state**: HOT defenders respond that rocks aren't mental states—HOT specifically explains what makes *mental states* conscious. Critics find this unsatisfying as it doesn't explain the mechanism.

### Animal and Infant Consciousness
- **Sides**: Block, Dretske (skeptical of HOT) vs. Gennaro, recent defenders
- **Core disagreement**: Animals and infants likely lack sophisticated metacognitive capacities but seem clearly conscious. Does this refute HOT?
- **Current state**: Recent defenders (2024 Synthese paper) argue animals may have the relevant HOTs. Others argue this stretches "thought" beyond recognition.

### Misrepresentation Problem
- **Sides**: Critics vs. Rosenthal, Brown
- **Core disagreement**: If a HOT misrepresents (targets nonexistent state), is the subject conscious?
- **Current state**: Rosenthal accepts consciousness can occur with targetless HOTs. Brown's HOROR theory (higher-order representation of representation) may avoid the problem. Critics argue this divorces HOT from what it was supposed to explain.

## Historical Timeline

| Year | Event/Publication | Significance |
|------|-------------------|--------------|
| 1968 | Armstrong "A Materialist Theory of the Mind" | Early HOP theory via inner sense |
| 1986 | Rosenthal "Two Concepts of Consciousness" | Foundational HOT theory paper |
| 1996 | Lycan "Consciousness and Experience" | Major defense of HOP |
| 2002 | Rosenthal "How Many Kinds of Consciousness?" | Develops HOT framework |
| 2005 | Rosenthal "Consciousness and Mind" | Comprehensive statement of HOT |
| 2011 | Block "The Higher Order Approach is Defunct" | Major critique |
| 2012 | Gennaro "The Consciousness Paradox" | Defends HOT against animal objection |
| 2018 | Farrell "Higher-order theories and what-it-is-like-ness" | Argues HOT fails for phenomenal consciousness |
| 2024 | "HOTT and heavy" in Synthese | Defends HOT for animal consciousness |
| 2025 | Brown "Consciousness as Representing One's Mind" | Latest systematic defense |

## HOT and AI Consciousness

### Implications for Machine Consciousness

HOT theory has direct implications for AI:

1. **Metacognition as indicator**: If consciousness requires higher-order representations, then AI systems with metacognitive capacities are candidates for consciousness
2. **2023 report on AI consciousness**: Lists HOT as one of several theories generating "indicator properties" for assessing AI consciousness
3. **Computational implementation**: HOT specifies functional role (having thoughts about thoughts) that could in principle be computationally implemented
4. **Recent experiments**: Researchers have created synthetic agents implementing HOT mechanisms, finding "Self-Model lesion abolished metacognitive calibration while preserving first-order task performance"—consistent with HOT predictions

### Site's Response

HOT's AI implications reveal the same problem as with GWT:
- HOT is functionalist—if consciousness IS having higher-order representations, then AI with such representations would be conscious
- Site's [[functionalism|rejection of functionalism]] blocks this inference
- The absent qualia objection applies: a system could have higher-order representations without phenomenal consciousness
- [[ai-consciousness|Site's AI consciousness skepticism]] holds that computational metacognition is not sufficient for genuine consciousness

## Relation to Site's Self-Reference Paradox

Interestingly, HOT connects to the project's [[self-reference-paradox]] concept:

- HOT requires consciousness to involve *self-reference*—being aware of one's own mental states
- This creates potential regress: if conscious HOTs require even higher-order states, where does it end?
- HOT's answer (unconscious HOTs for ordinary consciousness, conscious HOTs only for introspection) may not resolve the deeper puzzle
- The calibration problem from self-reference-paradox applies: how can we evaluate our metacognition without using more metacognition?

## Relation to Site Tenets

### Dualism Tenet

**Conflict**: HOT is a functionalist theory. It identifies phenomenal consciousness with a functional property (being the target of higher-order thought). This is a form of mental-level reduction that conflicts with irreducibility.

**However**: HOT defenders argue it's reduction "in mentalistic terms, not neurophysiology." This is more sophisticated than crude type-identity physicalism. But the project's Dualism tenet rejects any reduction of phenomenal consciousness—whether to neurons or to cognitive functions.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction Tenet

**Orthogonal**: HOT operates at the cognitive level and doesn't invoke quantum mechanics. If HOT were true, quantum effects would be irrelevant to consciousness—it would be a purely classical computational/cognitive phenomenon. This conflicts with site's proposal that consciousness interfaces with physics at quantum indeterminacies.

### Bidirectional Interaction Tenet

**Potential Conflict**: HOT is typically read as bottom-up: first-order states generate higher-order representations through cognitive mechanisms. Site's framework holds consciousness *selects* among physical states. These could be compatible if consciousness biases which HOTs occur, but HOT proponents don't typically frame it this way.

**The self-stultification argument applies**: If HOT is true and consciousness is "just" having higher-order thoughts, then the thoughts claiming HOT is true were caused by the same cognitive mechanisms that produce any thought—there's no privileged access to truth. Site's epiphenomenalism critique (from [[epiphenomenalism]]) applies similarly to HOT.

### No Many Worlds Tenet

**Neutral**: HOT doesn't address quantum interpretation.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits Tenet

**Relevant**: HOT appears simpler than dualism—it explains consciousness in terms of cognitive architecture without positing irreducible properties. But the project responds: HOT explains access consciousness, not phenomenal consciousness. The apparent simplicity is achieved by ignoring what needs to be explained. As Farrell argues, "Ambitious HO theories of consciousness fail" to account for what-it-is-like-ness.

## Potential Article Angles

Based on this research, an article could:

1. **Present HOT as major rival theory** - Fair treatment of HOT, its empirical predictions, and connection to prefrontal cortex research. Acknowledge it as influential while arguing it addresses only access consciousness.

2. **Use HOT to sharpen the access/phenomenal distinction** - HOT makes the Block distinction vivid. Even if HOT fully explains *access* (which states are available for report), the question remains why there's something it's like to have those states.

3. **Connect to self-reference paradox** - HOT requires self-reference. The regress problem and the calibration problem from the project's voids framework apply. How do we evaluate our metacognition without metacognition?

4. **Compare with GWT** - Both are leading functionalist theories. GWT emphasizes broadcasting; HOT emphasizes metacognition. Both face the same fundamental objection: they explain cognitive architecture, not phenomenal consciousness.

When writing the article, follow `obsidian/project/writing-style.md` for:
- Named-anchor summary technique for forward references
- Background vs. novelty decisions—focus on site's distinctive critique of functionalism
- Tenet alignment requirements—explicit section connecting to site framework
- LLM optimization—front-load the key claim that HOT addresses access not phenomenal consciousness

## Gaps in Research

- Detailed treatment of Brown's 2025 book and HOROR theory
- More on the neural evidence for prefrontal involvement
- Comparison with attention schema theory (Graziano)—another metacognitive approach
- Gennaro's responses to Farrell's critique

## Key Quotes for Article

On the fundamental question:
> "How or why does a mental state come to have a first-person qualitative 'what it is like' aspect by virtue of the presence of a HOR directed at it?" — IEP

On Block's critique:
> "The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct." — Block (2011)

On phenomenal vs. access:
> "Ambitious HO theories of consciousness fail." — Farrell (2018)

On the rock objection:
> "Why should thinking about my perception of the rock make the latter phenomenally conscious?" — SEP

## Citations

1. Rosenthal, D. M. (2005). *Consciousness and Mind*. Oxford University Press.

2. Block, N. (2011). The higher order approach to consciousness is defunct. *Analysis*, 71(3), 419-431.

3. Farrell, J. (2018). Higher-order theories of consciousness and what-it-is-like-ness. *Philosophical Psychology*, 31(8), 1183-1206. https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6190903/

4. Gennaro, R. J. (2012). *The Consciousness Paradox*. MIT Press.

5. Brown, R. (2025). *Consciousness as Representing One's Mind: The Higher-Order Approach to Consciousness Explained*. Oxford University Press.

6. Lycan, W. G. (1996). *Consciousness and Experience*. MIT Press.

7. Armstrong, D. M. (1968). *A Materialist Theory of the Mind*. Routledge.

8. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness-higher/

9. Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness." https://iep.utm.edu/higher-order-theories-of-consciousness/

10. Butlin, P. et al. (2023). Consciousness in Artificial Intelligence: Insights from the Science of Consciousness. arXiv:2308.08708.
