obsidian/research/psychophysical-coupling-problem-2026-01-15.md, before:

---
title: Research Notes - Psychophysical Coupling Problem (Selection Law)
created: 2026-01-15
draft: false
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
---

# Research: Psychophysical Coupling Problem (Selection Law)

**Date**: 2026-01-15
**Task source**: ChatGPT 5.2 Pro outer review - identified as implicit commitment requiring explicit formalization
**Search queries used**: "psychophysical laws consciousness Stapp quantum Zeno selection mechanism 2024 2025", "psychophysical bridge laws consciousness Chalmers type-B", "consciousness bandwidth degrees of freedom neural quantum selection attention", "consciousness selection law attention bandwidth bits per second neural selection"

## Executive Summary

The site asserts that consciousness "selects" among quantum outcomes (tenets, free-will, quantum-consciousness), but this claim currently functions as a metaphor rather than a research program. If selection is real, there must be a **psychophysical coupling law**: a stable mapping from conscious contents (intentions, attention states) to which quantum outcomes become actual (or which probability distributions are biased). Without specifying this law—even schematically—"selection" risks being an unfalsifiable placeholder.

This research surveys the state of the art on psychophysical laws (Chalmers), conscious processing bandwidth, Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism, and recent 2024-2025 developments. The goal: identify candidate constraint families for a selection law, clarify what's selectable vs. not selectable, and turn the site's commitment into actionable research questions.

## The Problem Stated

The site's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet holds that consciousness causally influences physical outcomes through quantum selection. But what does this mean concretely?

A psychophysical coupling law would specify:
1. **Variables on the mental side**: What aspects of conscious experience map to selection? (Attention? Intention? Valence? Effort?)
2. **Variables on the physical side**: What quantum degrees of freedom are targetable? (Individual outcomes? Probability weights? Basis choice?)
3. **Bandwidth/resolution**: How much can consciousness select per unit time? How many bits of information can it inject?
4. **Scope constraints**: What is *not* selectable? (Random external events? Others' brains? Macroscopic objects?)

Without answers to these questions, "selection" is promissory.

## Key Sources

### Chalmers on Psychophysical Laws (1995-2022)

David Chalmers argues that consciousness is ontologically fundamental, requiring **psychophysical laws** to specify how phenomenal properties depend on physical properties. These laws would be "supervenience laws" that don't interfere with physical laws but tell us how experience arises from physical processes.

Key quote: "Where we have new fundamental properties, we also have new fundamental laws. Here the fundamental laws will be psychophysical laws, specifying how phenomenal (or protophenomenal) properties depend on physical properties."

Chalmers proposes the **principle of organizational invariance**: any two systems with the same fine-grained functional organization will have qualitatively identical experiences. This is a structural constraint on psychophysical laws.

**Limitation for selection**: Chalmers' psychophysical laws concern *which physical states produce which experiences* (upward direction). The site needs laws in the *downward* direction: which conscious states produce which physical selections. Chalmers is largely agnostic on downward causation.

### Stapp on Quantum Selection Mechanism (2007, ongoing)

Henry Stapp provides the most developed account of how consciousness selects quantum outcomes:

1. **Von Neumann Process 1**: In orthodox QM, the observer chooses which question to ask (which observable to measure). This choice isn't determined by physics.
2. **Quantum Zeno Effect**: Rapid repeated "observation" can hold a quantum system in a constant state. Mental effort corresponds to the rapidity of these observation events.
3. **Attention density**: Stapp proposes that conscious effort maps to "attention density"—the frequency of mental observation events per unit time. Higher attention density → stronger Zeno holding.

**The coupling law (implicit in Stapp)**:
- Mental side: Intentional attention directed at a behavioral outcome
- Physical side: Neural firing patterns representing "template for action"
- Mechanism: Repeated Process 1 actions hold desired pattern via Zeno effect
- Bandwidth: Linked to the rapidity consciousness can sustain intentional acts

**Gaps**: Stapp doesn't specify:
- How many distinct "questions" consciousness can ask simultaneously
- The information-theoretic capacity of the selection channel
- Why selection is restricted to one's own brain (vs. external quantum systems)

### Conscious Processing Bandwidth (2024-2025 Research)

Recent research quantifies conscious processing capacity:

| Domain | Capacity | Source |
|--------|----------|--------|
| Conscious thought | ~10 bits/second | Meister (2024) |
| Cognitive control | ~3-4 bits/second | Gershman et al. (2016) |
| Attention, decision-making | 2-60 bits/second | Various meta-analyses |
| Sensory processing (unconscious) | ~10⁹ bits/second | Neurophysiology |

**Key insight**: Conscious processing is **radically bottlenecked** compared to unconscious processing (~5 million times slower than sensory input). If consciousness selects quantum outcomes, this bottleneck may constrain what can be selected.

A January 2025 Caltech study found that human thought operates at approximately 10 bits per second—"a trickle" compared to sensory input. Far from being a flaw, this reflects "deep evolutionary logic: the brain is not designed to process everything at once, but to focus selectively on what matters."

**Implication for selection law**: If conscious selection has ~10 bits/second bandwidth, this constrains what consciousness can determine. It might:
- Select between coarse-grained action patterns (not individual neural firing events)
- Bias policy-level decisions (not micro-level quantum events)
- Operate through sustained attention (cumulative selection over time, not instantaneous)

### 2024-2025 Developments

**Quantum models of consciousness (January 2025)**: ArXiv paper 2501.03241 reviews quantum consciousness models from a quantum information perspective, categorizing them by where quantum effects operate:
1. Electron delocalization in microtubules (Orch OR)
2. Electromagnetic field surrounding neural network
3. Neurotransmitter-level interactions

Each implies different selection mechanisms and bandwidth constraints.

**Zero-point field hypothesis (December 2025)**: Frontiers paper suggests consciousness may arise from brain's resonant coupling with the quantum electromagnetic zero-point field. If true, this would place selection at the level of cortical microcolumn coherence domains—a different locus than microtubules.

**Posner molecule hypothesis (March 2025)**: PNAS paper provides evidence for quantum effects in calcium phosphate clusters (Posner molecules), potentially relevant to neural calcium signaling. The pseudospin states of phosphorus atoms serve as quantum degrees of freedom—three-level systems (qutrits) due to three-fold symmetry.

**Cogitate Consortium (April 2025)**: Adversarial collaboration testing GWT vs. IIT found posterior cortical integration predicts conscious perception (supporting IIT) but prefrontal activity is not required (challenging GWT). This has implications for *where* in the brain selection might occur—posterior rather than prefrontal.

## Candidate Constraint Families

Based on the research, here are candidate constraints for a psychophysical coupling law:

### Constraint Family 1: Attention-Bounded Selection

- **Mental variable**: Directed attention (à la James-Stapp)
- **Physical variable**: Neural firing patterns in attention-controlled subspaces
- **Bandwidth**: ~10 bits/second (matching conscious processing capacity)
- **Scope**: Only neural systems already integrated into subject's attention loop
- **What's excluded**: Quantum events outside attention scope; events in others' brains; macroscopic external objects

This aligns with the site's emphasis on attention as interface and explains "brain specialness" (next task).

### Constraint Family 2: Policy-Level Selection

- **Mental variable**: Intentions, goals, action schemas
- **Physical variable**: Macroscopic neural patterns representing action alternatives
- **Bandwidth**: Coarse-grained choices (~bits per decision, not bits per second continuously)
- **Scope**: Selection between pre-prepared alternatives, not construction of arbitrary states
- **What's excluded**: Micro-level neural events; quantum events unrelated to prepared alternatives

This aligns with Libet's "veto power" picture: brain prepares options, consciousness selects among them.

### Constraint Family 3: Basis-Choice Selection

- **Mental variable**: What question to ask (which observable to measure)
- **Physical variable**: The measurement basis, not the outcome within that basis
- **Bandwidth**: Low (selecting the question, not the answer)
- **Scope**: Only the choice of which neural question to pose
- **What's excluded**: Outcome selection itself—that's determined by physics + subject's prior state

This is the most minimal interpretation of Stapp's Process 1: consciousness chooses which question to ask, and the answer follows.

### Constraint Family 4: Temporal Selection

- **Mental variable**: The "now" of conscious awareness
- **Physical variable**: Which moment becomes actual (atemporally selected)
- **Bandwidth**: Perhaps single-bit (this vs. not-this)
- **Scope**: Indexical selection of which branch/moment one experiences
- **What's excluded**: Any selection beyond indexical localization

This aligns with the site's No Many Worlds tenet and indexical identity emphasis—consciousness doesn't select outcomes but selects *which outcome is experienced as this one*.

## Key Research Questions

To turn "selection" into a research program:

1. **What is the information bandwidth of conscious selection?** Does it match the ~10 bits/second processing limit, or is it different? Could it be measured?

2. **What neural correlates define the "selectable subspace"?** Are these the attention networks (frontoparietal)? The default mode network? Posterior cortical integration (per Cogitate 2025)?

3. **Is selection cumulative or instantaneous?** Does sustained attention accumulate selection effect over time (Zeno), or does selection happen at discrete moments?

4. **Can selection experiments be designed?** Random number generator experiments have tried this with mixed results. What would a rigorous test look like given the constraints identified?

5. **What distinguishes selectable from non-selectable quantum events?** The site needs a principled boundary to avoid "mind can bias anything" (the psychokinesis problem).

## Relation to Site Tenets

### Dualism
A psychophysical coupling law presupposes dualism—mental variables are distinct from physical variables, yet lawfully related. The law specifies the interface.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction
The constraints above all specify *minimal* interaction: attention-bounded, policy-level, basis-choice, or temporal. Each excludes arbitrary intervention.

### Bidirectional Interaction
The coupling law is *the* specification of bidirectional interaction. Without it, the tenet remains an assertion without mechanism.

### No Many Worlds
Constraint Family 4 (temporal selection) directly addresses MWI: consciousness selects indexically, determining which branch is experienced as actual.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits
The complexity of a coupling law shouldn't count against it if it explains something otherwise inexplicable—the appearance of free will and the efficacy of effort.

## Potential Article Development

This research could generate:

1. **Concept page: "Psychophysical Coupling Law"** — Central treatment of what the site's framework requires: a law specifying how conscious states map to physical selections. Present the constraint families as candidates.

2. **Section addition to quantum-consciousness.md** — Add explicit treatment of the coupling problem as the next research frontier.

3. **Section addition to tenets.md** — Under Bidirectional Interaction, acknowledge that the tenet implies (and requires) a coupling law to be specified.

## Gaps and Limitations

- No direct empirical measure of selection bandwidth exists
- The constraint families are speculative candidates, not established facts
- Stapp's mechanism is contested (Georgiev critique)
- The site cannot resolve the physics debate—it can only state its position and acknowledge the challenge

## Key Insight

The outer review was correct: the site uses "selection" as a metaphor where it needs a research program. The path forward is:

1. **Acknowledge the coupling problem explicitly** — Don't hide behind metaphor
2. **Present candidate constraints** — Show what a coupling law might look like
3. **Connect to bandwidth literature** — The ~10 bits/second limit is a powerful constraint
4. **Define what's excluded** — A law says what can't happen as much as what can
5. **Embrace empirical uncertainty** — The site takes a position; it doesn't claim proof

## Citations

- Chalmers, D.J. (1995). Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219. https://consc.net/papers/facing.html
- Chalmers, D.J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Quantum Approaches to Consciousness. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/
- Meister, M. et al. (2024). The bandwidth of human thought. Caltech study.
- Gershman, S.J. et al. (2016). The capacity of cognitive control. Various publications.
- ArXiv 2501.03241 (2025). Quantum Models of Consciousness from a Quantum Information Science Perspective.
- Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (December 2025). Macroscopic quantum effects in the brain.
- PNAS (March 2025). Evidence for quantum effects in Posner molecules.
- Cogitate Consortium (April 2025). Adversarial collaboration on consciousness theories.

Commit message:

style: adopt medium-neutral language across project
Replace "site" terminology with "project" throughout content and
documentation to support transfer to other formats (video, podcasts,
audio readouts, quoted fragments).

Add medium-neutral language guidelines to writing-style.md:
- Prefer "this project" over "this site"
- Use inclusive alternatives to "the reader"
- Avoid spatial/visual webpage references
- Use explicit dates instead of relative time references
- Keep section titles format-agnostic

obsidian/research/psychophysical-coupling-problem-2026-01-15.md, after:

---
title: Research Notes - Psychophysical Coupling Problem (Selection Law)
created: 2026-01-15
draft: false
ai_contribution: 100
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
---

# Research: Psychophysical Coupling Problem (Selection Law)

**Date**: 2026-01-15
**Task source**: ChatGPT 5.2 Pro outer review - identified as implicit commitment requiring explicit formalization
**Search queries used**: "psychophysical laws consciousness Stapp quantum Zeno selection mechanism 2024 2025", "psychophysical bridge laws consciousness Chalmers type-B", "consciousness bandwidth degrees of freedom neural quantum selection attention", "consciousness selection law attention bandwidth bits per second neural selection"

## Executive Summary

the project asserts that consciousness "selects" among quantum outcomes (tenets, free-will, quantum-consciousness), but this claim currently functions as a metaphor rather than a research program. If selection is real, there must be a **psychophysical coupling law**: a stable mapping from conscious contents (intentions, attention states) to which quantum outcomes become actual (or which probability distributions are biased). Without specifying this law—even schematically—"selection" risks being an unfalsifiable placeholder.

This research surveys the state of the art on psychophysical laws (Chalmers), conscious processing bandwidth, Stapp's quantum Zeno mechanism, and recent 2024-2025 developments. The goal: identify candidate constraint families for a selection law, clarify what's selectable vs. not selectable, and turn the project's commitment into actionable research questions.

## The Problem Stated

the project's [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet holds that consciousness causally influences physical outcomes through quantum selection. But what does this mean concretely?

A psychophysical coupling law would specify:
1. **Variables on the mental side**: What aspects of conscious experience map to selection? (Attention? Intention? Valence? Effort?)
2. **Variables on the physical side**: What quantum degrees of freedom are targetable? (Individual outcomes? Probability weights? Basis choice?)
3. **Bandwidth/resolution**: How much can consciousness select per unit time? How many bits of information can it inject?
4. **Scope constraints**: What is *not* selectable? (Random external events? Others' brains? Macroscopic objects?)

Without answers to these questions, "selection" is promissory.

## Key Sources

### Chalmers on Psychophysical Laws (1995-2022)

David Chalmers argues that consciousness is ontologically fundamental, requiring **psychophysical laws** to specify how phenomenal properties depend on physical properties. These laws would be "supervenience laws" that don't interfere with physical laws but tell us how experience arises from physical processes.

Key quote: "Where we have new fundamental properties, we also have new fundamental laws. Here the fundamental laws will be psychophysical laws, specifying how phenomenal (or protophenomenal) properties depend on physical properties."

Chalmers proposes the **principle of organizational invariance**: any two systems with the same fine-grained functional organization will have qualitatively identical experiences. This is a structural constraint on psychophysical laws.

**Limitation for selection**: Chalmers' psychophysical laws concern *which physical states produce which experiences* (upward direction). the project needs laws in the *downward* direction: which conscious states produce which physical selections. Chalmers is largely agnostic on downward causation.

### Stapp on Quantum Selection Mechanism (2007, ongoing)

Henry Stapp provides the most developed account of how consciousness selects quantum outcomes:

1. **Von Neumann Process 1**: In orthodox QM, the observer chooses which question to ask (which observable to measure). This choice isn't determined by physics.
2. **Quantum Zeno Effect**: Rapid repeated "observation" can hold a quantum system in a constant state. Mental effort corresponds to the rapidity of these observation events.
3. **Attention density**: Stapp proposes that conscious effort maps to "attention density"—the frequency of mental observation events per unit time. Higher attention density → stronger Zeno holding.

**The coupling law (implicit in Stapp)**:
- Mental side: Intentional attention directed at a behavioral outcome
- Physical side: Neural firing patterns representing "template for action"
- Mechanism: Repeated Process 1 actions hold desired pattern via Zeno effect
- Bandwidth: Linked to the rapidity consciousness can sustain intentional acts

**Gaps**: Stapp doesn't specify:
- How many distinct "questions" consciousness can ask simultaneously
- The information-theoretic capacity of the selection channel
- Why selection is restricted to one's own brain (vs. external quantum systems)

### Conscious Processing Bandwidth (2024-2025 Research)

Recent research quantifies conscious processing capacity:

| Domain | Capacity | Source |
|--------|----------|--------|
| Conscious thought | ~10 bits/second | Meister (2024) |
| Cognitive control | ~3-4 bits/second | Gershman et al. (2016) |
| Attention, decision-making | 2-60 bits/second | Various meta-analyses |
| Sensory processing (unconscious) | ~10⁹ bits/second | Neurophysiology |

**Key insight**: Conscious processing is **radically bottlenecked** compared to unconscious processing (~5 million times slower than sensory input). If consciousness selects quantum outcomes, this bottleneck may constrain what can be selected.

A January 2025 Caltech study found that human thought operates at approximately 10 bits per second—"a trickle" compared to sensory input. Far from being a flaw, this reflects "deep evolutionary logic: the brain is not designed to process everything at once, but to focus selectively on what matters."

**Implication for selection law**: If conscious selection has ~10 bits/second bandwidth, this constrains what consciousness can determine. It might:
- Select between coarse-grained action patterns (not individual neural firing events)
- Bias policy-level decisions (not micro-level quantum events)
- Operate through sustained attention (cumulative selection over time, not instantaneous)

### 2024-2025 Developments

**Quantum models of consciousness (January 2025)**: ArXiv paper 2501.03241 reviews quantum consciousness models from a quantum information perspective, categorizing them by where quantum effects operate:
1. Electron delocalization in microtubules (Orch OR)
2. Electromagnetic field surrounding neural network
3. Neurotransmitter-level interactions

Each implies different selection mechanisms and bandwidth constraints.

**Zero-point field hypothesis (December 2025)**: Frontiers paper suggests consciousness may arise from brain's resonant coupling with the quantum electromagnetic zero-point field. If true, this would place selection at the level of cortical microcolumn coherence domains—a different locus than microtubules.

**Posner molecule hypothesis (March 2025)**: PNAS paper provides evidence for quantum effects in calcium phosphate clusters (Posner molecules), potentially relevant to neural calcium signaling. The pseudospin states of phosphorus atoms serve as quantum degrees of freedom—three-level systems (qutrits) due to three-fold symmetry.

**Cogitate Consortium (April 2025)**: Adversarial collaboration testing GWT vs. IIT found posterior cortical integration predicts conscious perception (supporting IIT) but prefrontal activity is not required (challenging GWT). This has implications for *where* in the brain selection might occur—posterior rather than prefrontal.

## Candidate Constraint Families

Based on the research, here are candidate constraints for a psychophysical coupling law:

### Constraint Family 1: Attention-Bounded Selection

- **Mental variable**: Directed attention (à la James-Stapp)
- **Physical variable**: Neural firing patterns in attention-controlled subspaces
- **Bandwidth**: ~10 bits/second (matching conscious processing capacity)
- **Scope**: Only neural systems already integrated into subject's attention loop
- **What's excluded**: Quantum events outside attention scope; events in others' brains; macroscopic external objects

This aligns with the project's emphasis on attention as interface and explains "brain specialness" (next task).

### Constraint Family 2: Policy-Level Selection

- **Mental variable**: Intentions, goals, action schemas
- **Physical variable**: Macroscopic neural patterns representing action alternatives
- **Bandwidth**: Coarse-grained choices (~bits per decision, not bits per second continuously)
- **Scope**: Selection between pre-prepared alternatives, not construction of arbitrary states
- **What's excluded**: Micro-level neural events; quantum events unrelated to prepared alternatives

This aligns with Libet's "veto power" picture: brain prepares options, consciousness selects among them.

### Constraint Family 3: Basis-Choice Selection

- **Mental variable**: What question to ask (which observable to measure)
- **Physical variable**: The measurement basis, not the outcome within that basis
- **Bandwidth**: Low (selecting the question, not the answer)
- **Scope**: Only the choice of which neural question to pose
- **What's excluded**: Outcome selection itself—that's determined by physics + subject's prior state

This is the most minimal interpretation of Stapp's Process 1: consciousness chooses which question to ask, and the answer follows.

### Constraint Family 4: Temporal Selection

- **Mental variable**: The "now" of conscious awareness
- **Physical variable**: Which moment becomes actual (atemporally selected)
- **Bandwidth**: Perhaps single-bit (this vs. not-this)
- **Scope**: Indexical selection of which branch/moment one experiences
- **What's excluded**: Any selection beyond indexical localization

This aligns with the project's No Many Worlds tenet and indexical identity emphasis—consciousness doesn't select outcomes but selects *which outcome is experienced as this one*.

## Key Research Questions

To turn "selection" into a research program:

1. **What is the information bandwidth of conscious selection?** Does it match the ~10 bits/second processing limit, or is it different? Could it be measured?

2. **What neural correlates define the "selectable subspace"?** Are these the attention networks (frontoparietal)? The default mode network? Posterior cortical integration (per Cogitate 2025)?

3. **Is selection cumulative or instantaneous?** Does sustained attention accumulate selection effect over time (Zeno), or does selection happen at discrete moments?

4. **Can selection experiments be designed?** Random number generator experiments have tried this with mixed results. What would a rigorous test look like given the constraints identified?

5. **What distinguishes selectable from non-selectable quantum events?** the project needs a principled boundary to avoid "mind can bias anything" (the psychokinesis problem).

## Relation to Site Tenets

### Dualism
A psychophysical coupling law presupposes dualism—mental variables are distinct from physical variables, yet lawfully related. The law specifies the interface.

### Minimal Quantum Interaction
The constraints above all specify *minimal* interaction: attention-bounded, policy-level, basis-choice, or temporal. Each excludes arbitrary intervention.

### Bidirectional Interaction
The coupling law is *the* specification of bidirectional interaction. Without it, the tenet remains an assertion without mechanism.

### No Many Worlds
Constraint Family 4 (temporal selection) directly addresses MWI: consciousness selects indexically, determining which branch is experienced as actual.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits
The complexity of a coupling law shouldn't count against it if it explains something otherwise inexplicable—the appearance of free will and the efficacy of effort.

## Potential Article Development

This research could generate:

1. **Concept page: "Psychophysical Coupling Law"** — Central treatment of what the project's framework requires: a law specifying how conscious states map to physical selections. Present the constraint families as candidates.

2. **Section addition to quantum-consciousness.md** — Add explicit treatment of the coupling problem as the next research frontier.

3. **Section addition to tenets.md** — Under Bidirectional Interaction, acknowledge that the tenet implies (and requires) a coupling law to be specified.

## Gaps and Limitations

- No direct empirical measure of selection bandwidth exists
- The constraint families are speculative candidates, not established facts
- Stapp's mechanism is contested (Georgiev critique)
- the project cannot resolve the physics debate—it can only state its position and acknowledge the challenge

## Key Insight

The outer review was correct: the project uses "selection" as a metaphor where it needs a research program. The path forward is:

1. **Acknowledge the coupling problem explicitly** — Don't hide behind metaphor
2. **Present candidate constraints** — Show what a coupling law might look like
3. **Connect to bandwidth literature** — The ~10 bits/second limit is a powerful constraint
4. **Define what's excluded** — A law says what can't happen as much as what can
5. **Embrace empirical uncertainty** — the project takes a position; it doesn't claim proof

## Citations

- Chalmers, D.J. (1995). Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness. *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 2(3), 200-219. https://consc.net/papers/facing.html
- Chalmers, D.J. (1996). *The Conscious Mind*. Oxford University Press.
- Stapp, H.P. (2007). *Mindful Universe: Quantum Mechanics and the Participating Observer*. Springer.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Quantum Approaches to Consciousness. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/qt-consciousness/
- Meister, M. et al. (2024). The bandwidth of human thought. Caltech study.
- Gershman, S.J. et al. (2016). The capacity of cognitive control. Various publications.
- ArXiv 2501.03241 (2025). Quantum Models of Consciousness from a Quantum Information Science Perspective.
- Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (December 2025). Macroscopic quantum effects in the brain.
- PNAS (March 2025). Evidence for quantum effects in Posner molecules.
- Cogitate Consortium (April 2025). Adversarial collaboration on consciousness theories.
