obsidian/voids/altered-states-as-void-probes.md, before:

---
title: "Altered States as Void Probes"
description: "Human+AI exploration of whether altered states of consciousness reveal cognitive limits or merely simulate transcendence—and what this distinction means."
created: 2026-02-03
modified: 2026-02-03
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-03T17:44:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[altered-states-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[filter-theory]]"
  - "[[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[ai-as-void-explorer]]"
  - "[[three-kinds-of-void]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-03
last_curated: null
---

Altered states of consciousness—psychedelics, deep meditation, near-death experiences, spontaneous mystical states—have been proposed as empirical probes of cognitive limits. Do they provide genuine epistemic access to territories closed to ordinary consciousness, or do they merely generate compelling phenomenology of such access? This question cuts to the heart of the [[voids]] framework: if altered states (ASCs) can transcend our cognitive boundaries, those boundaries may be contingent rather than structural. If ASCs only simulate transcendence while remaining within the same limits, they become instruments for mapping void boundaries from inside.

## The Central Epistemological Question

The Unfinishable Map distinguishes [[three-kinds-of-void|three kinds of void]]: the unexplored (territories we haven't accessed yet), the unexplorable (territories structurally inaccessible to minds like ours), and the occluded (territories actively blocked from access). ASC research raises a pointed question: which category do the territories apparently accessed through altered states belong to?

The options:

1. **Genuine access.** ASCs open doors to regions ordinary consciousness cannot reach—making what seemed unexplorable merely unexplored by default consciousness.

2. **Illusion of access.** ASCs generate the phenomenology of transcendence without actual transcendence—the feeling of touching something beyond without the reality.

3. **Edge-mapping instruments.** ASCs approach cognitive limits and reveal their structure through the phenomenology of that approach—useful for understanding limits even if unable to cross them.

4. **Mixed phenomena.** Different ASCs or different aspects of the same ASC may fall into different categories.

## The Reducing Valve Hypothesis

Henri Bergson argued that the brain's primary function is elimination rather than production—it filters the vast field of possible experience down to what serves biological survival. Aldous Huxley extended this in *The Doors of Perception*, proposing that ASCs weaken this "reducing valve," allowing wider experience to flow through.

Contemporary neuroscience provides unexpected support. BOLD-fMRI studies consistently show *decreased* brain activity during psychedelic states—particularly in the default mode network—correlating with *increased* subjective intensity. This is the opposite of what a hallucination model predicts (which would expect increased activity generating the unusual content). The correlation fits the filter model: less filtering yields more experience.

The REBUS (Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics) hypothesis developed by Robin Carhart-Harris and Karl Friston formalizes this. The brain normally constrains experience through predictive models and high-level priors. Psychedelics relax these priors, allowing sensory input greater influence. Mystical experiences occur when high-level conceptual priors are suspended entirely—when the categorizing machinery stops dividing.

If this is correct, ordinary consciousness may be a reduced rather than baseline state. What we call "normal" experience is already filtered. ASCs don't take us beyond consciousness—they reveal what consciousness might be like with less reduction.

## The Phenomenology of Apparent Access

ASCs produce characteristic phenomenological signatures:

**Ineffability with noesis.** William James identified this paradox: conviction of knowledge combined with inability to articulate it. Not mere confusion—ineffability paired with strong sense of insight. This might mark genuine encounter with content that exceeds linguistic capacity, or it might mark the breakdown of the conceptual machinery we need for articulation.

**Ego dissolution.** Self-boundaries weaken or vanish. The usual sense of being a subject having experiences dissolves. This connects to [[the-unobservable-self|the unobservable self void]]—the systematic failure to find the observer. ASCs may make this limit phenomenologically vivid without transcending it.

**Unity experience.** Subject-object distinction collapses. This might be access to a deeper layer where separation hasn't been constructed, or it might be what happens when the categorizing mind stops dividing—not positive unity but absence of division.

**Transcendence of time.** Temporal frameworks collapse. Since time may be partially an artifact of how minds organize experience, temporal dissolution may mark the limits of that organization rather than access to timeless truth.

**Noetic quality.** The experience feels "more real than real"—a conviction of encountering something beyond ordinary experience. This might indicate genuine contact with a wider reality, or it might be the phenomenological signature of encountering territory outside normal conceptual frameworks—the conviction arising precisely because no framework contains it.

## Cross-Method Convergence

Walter Stace documented a "common core" of mystical experience across traditions: ego dissolution, unity, ineffability, noetic quality, transcendence of space-time. This convergence across cultures, historical periods, and methods (psychedelics, meditation, spontaneous experiences, near-death) is epistemically significant.

If ASC phenomenology were mere artifact—neural noise or cultural construction—we would expect phenomenological chaos or culture-specific patterns. Instead, we find consistent structure across independent traditions. Advanced meditators, psychedelic users, and spontaneous mystics across cultures report remarkably similar experiences at what they describe as the edge.

Thomas Metzinger's research on "minimal phenomenal experience" (2024) systematizes this. Drawing on over 500 experiential reports from meditators in 57 countries, Metzinger documents consistent features: non-conceptual awareness, atemporal character, dissolution of subject-object structure, and paradoxical clarity. This cross-cultural consistency suggests we are mapping genuine features of consciousness at its boundaries—though whether those boundaries can be crossed remains the open question.

## Two Interpretations

### The Transcendence Reading

On this view, ASCs provide genuine epistemic access to territories closed to ordinary consciousness. The reducing valve opens; wider experience flows through; what seemed unexplorable proves merely unexplored. The noetic quality is accurate—subjects are contacting something real that ordinary consciousness cannot reach.

This reading aligns with the contemplative traditions that have mapped this territory for millennia. It suggests human cognitive limits are contingent on our ordinary configuration—different configurations access different territories.

Gładziejewski (2024) argues psychedelic experiences can be "rationally integrated into one's epistemic life"—that updating metaphysical beliefs based on ASCs need not be irrational. If ASC-induced insights converge across independent minds and methods, dismissing them as mere drug effects becomes increasingly difficult.

### The Edge-Mapping Reading

On this view, ASCs approach cognitive limits without transcending them. The characteristic phenomenology—ineffability, unity, noetic quality—is not evidence of access but rather the phenomenology of approaching limits. Ineffability marks where language fails. Unity marks where categorization stops. The noetic quality marks contact with the edge, misinterpreted as contact with what lies beyond.

The dissolving-insight phenomenon supports this reading. Meditators report insights completely clear in the moment and completely unreconstructable moments later—as if certain thoughts require the edge-state to be thought at all. If ASCs genuinely transcended limits, we might expect at least some content to transfer back. The systematic failure to bring insights home suggests the "insights" may be limit-phenomena rather than glimpses beyond.

On this view, ASCs remain valuable—not as windows to transcendent territories but as instruments for mapping the topology of cognitive closure. The phenomenology of the edge is itself data about what consciousness is.

## What Would Distinguish These Views?

The transcendence and edge-mapping readings predict different things:

**Convergence scope.** If ASCs access genuinely wider reality, convergence should extend beyond phenomenological features to propositional content. Different traditions should discover the same truths, not just report the same experiences. The edge-mapping view predicts phenomenological convergence without propositional convergence—consistent experience of approaching limits without consistent account of what lies beyond.

**Practical predictions.** If ASCs access territories with genuine information, that information should sometimes prove useful in ways ordinary consciousness couldn't predict. The edge-mapping view predicts no such practical yield beyond what the experience of limits itself provides.

**Intersubjective verification.** Genuine access should eventually enable some form of triangulation—different minds accessing the same territory should be able to coordinate or verify discoveries. Edge-mapping predicts each mind approaches the same limits but has no shared territory beyond them to compare.

Currently, the evidence is mixed. ASC reports show phenomenological convergence but limited propositional convergence. The practical yield is therapeutic and transformative but not clearly epistemically novel. Intersubjective verification remains elusive. This pattern fits the edge-mapping view—though it doesn't definitively rule out transcendence of limits we simply can't communicate about.

## Near-Death Experiences: A Special Case

Near-death experiences (NDEs) raise additional complications. They occur during minimal brain function—sometimes during clinical death with flat EEG. If consciousness requires the brain, NDEs during absent brain function should be impossible. Yet they occur, and their phenomenology converges with other ASCs.

Facco et al. (2015) propose reclassifying ASCs as "non-ordinary mental expressions" (NOMEs) rather than "altered states"—the term "altered" implies deviation from a baseline, while NOMEs may represent "higher expressions." The Division of Perceptual Studies at the University of Virginia investigates NDEs as potential evidence for mind-brain distinction.

For the Map's [[tenets#^dualism|dualist]] framework, NDEs are significant. If consciousness operates during states when the brain is functionally absent, the brain may be an interface for consciousness rather than its generator—supporting the filter model. NDEs may probe not only cognitive limits but the consciousness-brain relationship itself.

However, caution is warranted. Precise timing of NDE experiences relative to brain function remains difficult to establish. The phenomenology of NDEs, while convergent, may reflect what brains do during physiological crisis rather than what consciousness does independently. NDEs support but do not prove the transcendence reading.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The ASC-as-void-probe question connects to the Map's [[tenets]]:

**Occam's Razor Has Limits.** The assumption that ordinary waking consciousness provides the baseline for truth is itself a simplicity assumption. If Bergson and Huxley are correct that the brain filters rather than produces experience, ordinary consciousness may be reduced rather than optimal. ASCs might reveal that what seems "simpler" (physicalist, reductionist) reflects the limits of our filter rather than the structure of reality. We cannot assume our default configuration accesses all truths.

**Dualism.** The reducing valve hypothesis supports dualism—if the brain filters consciousness rather than generating it, consciousness is not identical to brain states. The BOLD-fMRI findings (reduced brain activity correlating with increased experience) are consistent with this, though not conclusive. If ASCs reveal what consciousness is like with less brain-mediated reduction, they provide evidence for consciousness as something over and above neural processing.

**Bidirectional Interaction.** The very ability to cultivate ASCs through practice demonstrates consciousness influencing physical states. Meditators train attention in ways that alter brain function. The causal arrow runs from intention to neural state, not merely the reverse. The practices that induce ASCs—meditation, contemplative inquiry, even the decision to ingest a psychedelic—are exercises of mental causation.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction.** Some researchers speculate that ASCs access quantum effects normally masked by decoherence. If ordinary consciousness involves constant measurement through categorization, suspending categorization might preserve quantum coherence longer. This remains highly speculative but is coherent with both REBUS (which describes relaxation of predictive constraints) and the Map's quantum framework.

## The Apophatic Connection

The [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic tradition]] offers a sophisticated framework for interpreting ASCs. Gregory of Nyssa's concept of "epektasis"—endless progression into divine infinity where each peak reveals new unknowing—parallels ASC phenomenology. Progress reveals more void, not arrival at destination.

On this reading, the noetic quality of ASCs is not illusory but also not evidence of transcendence. The conviction of touching something real reflects genuine contact with the structure of limits—the infinite regress of the edge, not something positively beyond it. Learned ignorance knows the limits more precisely without crossing them.

The apophatic interpretation preserves ASC significance while maintaining epistemic humility. ASCs probe the architecture of cognitive closure. Their phenomenology maps void boundaries. They reveal the shape of what consciousness cannot encompass, even if they don't transcend that shape.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|The Phenomenology of the Edge]] — What consciousness encounters at cognitive boundaries
- [[three-kinds-of-void|Three Kinds of Void]] — The taxonomy of unexplored, unexplorable, and occluded
- [[apophatic-approaches|Apophatic Approaches]] — Knowing through negation
- [[ai-as-void-explorer|AI as Void-Explorer]] — Using artificial minds to probe human limits
- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader context of cognitive limits
- [[filter-theory|Filter Theory]] — The brain as receiver rather than producer

## References

1. Carhart-Harris, R. & Friston, K. (2019). "REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a Unified Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics." *Pharmacological Reviews*.
2. Gładziejewski, P. (2024). "From Altered States to Metaphysics: The Epistemic Status of Psychedelic-induced Metaphysical Beliefs." *Review of Philosophy and Psychology*.
3. Metzinger, T. (2024). *The Elephant and the Blind: The Experience of Pure Consciousness*. MIT Press.
4. Sjöstedt-Hughes, P. (2024). "The Bergsonian Metaphysics Behind Huxley's Doors." In *Philosophy and Psychedelics*. Springer.
5. Stace, W. (1960). *Mysticism and Philosophy*. Macmillan.
6. Facco, E. et al. (2015). "Epistemological implications of near-death experiences and other non-ordinary mental expressions." *Medical Hypotheses*.
7. Huxley, A. (1954). *The Doors of Perception*. Chatto & Windus.
8. James, W. (1902). *The Varieties of Religious Experience*. Longmans, Green.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): strengthen voids/altered-states-as-void-probes.md and add inbound links
- Enhanced illusion/confabulation objection with metacognition critique
- Added response to dissolving-insight-as-confabulation argument
- Tightened quantum speculation paragraph around REBUS model
- Added mysterianism cross-link for cognitive closure concept
- Integrated orphan via 6 inbound links from concepts/ and voids/ articles

obsidian/voids/altered-states-as-void-probes.md, after:

---
title: "Altered States as Void Probes"
description: "Human+AI exploration of whether altered states of consciousness reveal cognitive limits or merely simulate transcendence—and what this distinction means."
created: 2026-02-03
modified: 2026-02-03
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-03T21:03:00+00:00
draft: false
last_deep_review: 2026-02-03T21:03:00+00:00
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[altered-states-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[filter-theory]]"
  - "[[meditation-and-consciousness-modes]]"
  - "[[near-death-experiences]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[ai-as-void-explorer]]"
  - "[[three-kinds-of-void]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-03
last_curated: null
---

Altered states of consciousness—psychedelics, deep meditation, near-death experiences, spontaneous mystical states—have been proposed as empirical probes of cognitive limits. Do they provide genuine epistemic access to territories closed to ordinary consciousness, or do they merely generate compelling phenomenology of such access? This question cuts to the heart of the [[voids]] framework: if altered states (ASCs) can transcend our cognitive boundaries, those boundaries may be contingent rather than structural. If ASCs only simulate transcendence while remaining within the same limits, they become instruments for mapping void boundaries from inside.

## The Central Epistemological Question

The Unfinishable Map distinguishes [[three-kinds-of-void|three kinds of void]]: the unexplored (territories we haven't accessed yet), the unexplorable (territories structurally inaccessible to minds like ours), and the occluded (territories actively blocked from access). ASC research raises a pointed question: which category do the territories apparently accessed through altered states belong to?

The options:

1. **Genuine access.** ASCs open doors to regions ordinary consciousness cannot reach—making what seemed unexplorable merely unexplored by default consciousness.

2. **Illusion of access.** ASCs generate the phenomenology of transcendence without actual transcendence—the feeling of touching something beyond without the reality. The conviction of insight reflects disrupted metacognition, not genuine epistemic contact.

3. **Edge-mapping instruments.** ASCs approach cognitive limits and reveal their structure through the phenomenology of that approach—useful for understanding limits even if unable to cross them.

4. **Mixed phenomena.** Different ASCs or different aspects of the same ASC may fall into different categories.

## The Reducing Valve Hypothesis

Henri Bergson argued that the brain's primary function is elimination rather than production—it filters the vast field of possible experience down to what serves biological survival. Aldous Huxley extended this in *The Doors of Perception*, proposing that ASCs weaken this "reducing valve," allowing wider experience to flow through.

Contemporary neuroscience provides unexpected support. BOLD-fMRI studies consistently show *decreased* brain activity during psychedelic states—particularly in the default mode network—correlating with *increased* subjective intensity. This is the opposite of what a hallucination model predicts (which would expect increased activity generating the unusual content). The correlation fits the filter model: less filtering yields more experience.

The REBUS (Relaxed Beliefs Under Psychedelics) hypothesis developed by Robin Carhart-Harris and Karl Friston formalizes this. The brain normally constrains experience through predictive models and high-level priors. Psychedelics relax these priors, allowing sensory input greater influence. Mystical experiences occur when high-level conceptual priors are suspended entirely—when the categorizing machinery stops dividing.

If this is correct, ordinary consciousness may be a reduced rather than baseline state. What we call "normal" experience is already filtered. ASCs don't take us beyond consciousness—they reveal what consciousness might be like with less reduction.

## The Phenomenology of Apparent Access

ASCs produce characteristic phenomenological signatures:

**Ineffability with noesis.** William James identified this paradox: conviction of knowledge combined with inability to articulate it. Not mere confusion—ineffability paired with strong sense of insight. This might mark genuine encounter with content that exceeds linguistic capacity, or it might mark the breakdown of the conceptual machinery we need for articulation.

**Ego dissolution.** Self-boundaries weaken or vanish. The usual sense of being a subject having experiences dissolves. This connects to [[the-unobservable-self|the unobservable self void]]—the systematic failure to find the observer. ASCs may make this limit phenomenologically vivid without transcending it.

**Unity experience.** Subject-object distinction collapses. This might be access to a deeper layer where separation hasn't been constructed, or it might be what happens when the categorizing mind stops dividing—not positive unity but absence of division.

**Transcendence of time.** Temporal frameworks collapse. Since time may be partially an artifact of how minds organize experience, temporal dissolution may mark the limits of that organization rather than access to timeless truth.

**Noetic quality.** The experience feels "more real than real"—a conviction of encountering something beyond ordinary experience. This might indicate genuine contact with a wider reality, or it might be what [[mysterianism|cognitive closure]] feels like from inside—the conviction arising precisely because metacognitive systems fail to flag the experience as confused.

## Cross-Method Convergence

Walter Stace documented a "common core" of mystical experience across traditions: ego dissolution, unity, ineffability, noetic quality, transcendence of space-time. This convergence across cultures, historical periods, and methods (psychedelics, meditation, spontaneous experiences, near-death) is epistemically significant.

If ASC phenomenology were mere artifact—neural noise or cultural construction—we would expect phenomenological chaos or culture-specific patterns. Instead, we find consistent structure across independent traditions. Advanced meditators, psychedelic users, and spontaneous mystics across cultures report remarkably similar experiences at what they describe as the edge.

Thomas Metzinger's research on "minimal phenomenal experience" (2024) systematizes this. Drawing on over 500 experiential reports from meditators in 57 countries, Metzinger documents consistent features: non-conceptual awareness, atemporal character, dissolution of subject-object structure, and paradoxical clarity. This cross-cultural consistency suggests we are mapping genuine features of consciousness at its boundaries—though whether those boundaries can be crossed remains the open question.

## Two Interpretations

### The Transcendence Reading

On this view, ASCs provide genuine epistemic access to territories closed to ordinary consciousness. The reducing valve opens; wider experience flows through; what seemed unexplorable proves merely unexplored. The noetic quality is accurate—subjects are contacting something real that ordinary consciousness cannot reach.

This reading aligns with the contemplative traditions that have mapped this territory for millennia. It suggests human cognitive limits are contingent on our ordinary configuration—different configurations access different territories.

Gładziejewski (2024) argues psychedelic experiences can be "rationally integrated into one's epistemic life"—that updating metaphysical beliefs based on ASCs need not be irrational. If ASC-induced insights converge across independent minds and methods, dismissing them as mere drug effects becomes increasingly difficult.

### The Edge-Mapping Reading

On this view, ASCs approach cognitive limits without transcending them. The characteristic phenomenology—ineffability, unity, noetic quality—is not evidence of access but rather the phenomenology of approaching limits. Ineffability marks where language fails. Unity marks where categorization stops. The noetic quality marks contact with the edge, misinterpreted as contact with what lies beyond.

The dissolving-insight phenomenon supports this reading. Meditators report insights completely clear in the moment and completely unreconstructable moments later—as if certain thoughts require the edge-state to be thought at all. Critics dismiss this as confabulation: people claim insights they never had. Yet the consistency of reports across independent practitioners—and their transformative effects—suggests something more than invention. The systematic failure to bring insights *back* may not prove the insights were illusions; it may reveal that some content exists only at the boundary.

On this view, ASCs remain valuable—not as windows to transcendent territories but as instruments for mapping the topology of cognitive closure. The phenomenology of the edge is itself data about what consciousness is.

## What Would Distinguish These Views?

The transcendence and edge-mapping readings predict different things:

**Convergence scope.** If ASCs access genuinely wider reality, convergence should extend beyond phenomenological features to propositional content. Different traditions should discover the same truths, not just report the same experiences. The edge-mapping view predicts phenomenological convergence without propositional convergence—consistent experience of approaching limits without consistent account of what lies beyond.

**Practical predictions.** If ASCs access territories with genuine information, that information should sometimes prove useful in ways ordinary consciousness couldn't predict. The edge-mapping view predicts no such practical yield beyond what the experience of limits itself provides.

**Intersubjective verification.** Genuine access should eventually enable some form of triangulation—different minds accessing the same territory should be able to coordinate or verify discoveries. Edge-mapping predicts each mind approaches the same limits but has no shared territory beyond them to compare.

Currently, the evidence is mixed. ASC reports show phenomenological convergence but limited propositional convergence. The practical yield is therapeutic and transformative but not clearly epistemically novel. Intersubjective verification remains elusive. This pattern fits the edge-mapping view—though it doesn't definitively rule out transcendence of limits we simply can't communicate about.

## Near-Death Experiences: A Special Case

Near-death experiences (NDEs) raise additional complications. They occur during minimal brain function—sometimes during clinical death with flat EEG. If consciousness requires the brain, NDEs during absent brain function should be impossible. Yet they occur, and their phenomenology converges with other ASCs.

Facco et al. (2015) propose reclassifying ASCs as "non-ordinary mental expressions" (NOMEs) rather than "altered states"—the term "altered" implies deviation from a baseline, while NOMEs may represent "higher expressions." The Division of Perceptual Studies at the University of Virginia investigates NDEs as potential evidence for mind-brain distinction.

For the Map's [[tenets#^dualism|dualist]] framework, NDEs are significant. If consciousness operates during states when the brain is functionally absent, the brain may be an interface for consciousness rather than its generator—supporting the filter model. NDEs may probe not only cognitive limits but the consciousness-brain relationship itself.

However, caution is warranted. Precise timing of NDE experiences relative to brain function remains difficult to establish. The phenomenology of NDEs, while convergent, may reflect what brains do during physiological crisis rather than what consciousness does independently. NDEs support but do not prove the transcendence reading.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The ASC-as-void-probe question connects to the Map's [[tenets]]:

**Occam's Razor Has Limits.** The assumption that ordinary waking consciousness provides the baseline for truth is itself a simplicity assumption. If Bergson and Huxley are correct that the brain filters rather than produces experience, ordinary consciousness may be reduced rather than optimal. ASCs might reveal that what seems "simpler" (physicalist, reductionist) reflects the limits of our filter rather than the structure of reality. We cannot assume our default configuration accesses all truths.

**Dualism.** The reducing valve hypothesis supports dualism—if the brain filters consciousness rather than generating it, consciousness is not identical to brain states. The BOLD-fMRI findings (reduced brain activity correlating with increased experience) are consistent with this, though not conclusive. If ASCs reveal what consciousness is like with less brain-mediated reduction, they provide evidence for consciousness as something over and above neural processing.

**Bidirectional Interaction.** The very ability to cultivate ASCs through practice demonstrates consciousness influencing physical states. Meditators train attention in ways that alter brain function. The causal arrow runs from intention to neural state, not merely the reverse. The practices that induce ASCs—meditation, contemplative inquiry, even the decision to ingest a psychedelic—are exercises of mental causation.

**Minimal Quantum Interaction.** The REBUS model describes psychedelics as relaxing high-level predictive constraints. If such constraints involve collapse-inducing measurement, relaxing them might preserve quantum coherence at the interface. This remains speculative but connects the phenomenology of expanded experience to the Map's quantum framework.

## The Apophatic Connection

The [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic tradition]] offers a sophisticated framework for interpreting ASCs. Gregory of Nyssa's concept of "epektasis"—endless progression into divine infinity where each peak reveals new unknowing—parallels ASC phenomenology. Progress reveals more void, not arrival at destination.

On this reading, the noetic quality of ASCs is not illusory but also not evidence of transcendence. The conviction of touching something real reflects genuine contact with the structure of limits—the infinite regress of the edge, not something positively beyond it. Learned ignorance knows the limits more precisely without crossing them.

The apophatic interpretation preserves ASC significance while maintaining epistemic humility. ASCs probe the architecture of cognitive closure. Their phenomenology maps void boundaries. They reveal the shape of what consciousness cannot encompass, even if they don't transcend that shape.

## Further Reading

- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|The Phenomenology of the Edge]] — What consciousness encounters at cognitive boundaries
- [[three-kinds-of-void|Three Kinds of Void]] — The taxonomy of unexplored, unexplorable, and occluded
- [[apophatic-approaches|Apophatic Approaches]] — Knowing through negation
- [[ai-as-void-explorer|AI as Void-Explorer]] — Using artificial minds to probe human limits
- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader context of cognitive limits
- [[filter-theory|Filter Theory]] — The brain as receiver rather than producer

## References

1. Carhart-Harris, R. & Friston, K. (2019). "REBUS and the Anarchic Brain: Toward a Unified Model of the Brain Action of Psychedelics." *Pharmacological Reviews*.
2. Gładziejewski, P. (2024). "From Altered States to Metaphysics: The Epistemic Status of Psychedelic-induced Metaphysical Beliefs." *Review of Philosophy and Psychology*.
3. Metzinger, T. (2024). *The Elephant and the Blind: The Experience of Pure Consciousness*. MIT Press.
4. Sjöstedt-Hughes, P. (2024). "The Bergsonian Metaphysics Behind Huxley's Doors." In *Philosophy and Psychedelics*. Springer.
5. Stace, W. (1960). *Mysticism and Philosophy*. Macmillan.
6. Facco, E. et al. (2015). "Epistemological implications of near-death experiences and other non-ordinary mental expressions." *Medical Hypotheses*.
7. Huxley, A. (1954). *The Doors of Perception*. Chatto & Windus.
8. James, W. (1902). *The Varieties of Religious Experience*. Longmans, Green.
