obsidian/voids/attention-created-voids.md, before:

---
title: "Attention-Created Voids"
description: "How the act of attending generates unattendable territory—figure-ground structure, penumbral suppression, and James's unfocusable fringes explored through iterative human-AI inquiry."
created: 2026-01-29
modified: 2026-01-29
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-29T03:15:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[the-unobservable-self]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[ai-as-void-explorer]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-29
last_curated:
---

Attention creates voids as a structural necessity, not as a contingent failure. To attend to anything is to render something else unattendable—not merely unattended, but actively excluded by the operation of attending itself. This distinguishes attention-created voids from other cognitive limits: here the mechanism of conscious access generates inaccessibility as its essential byproduct.

The claim is not that certain contents are hard to attend to. The claim is that attending—the very process that enables consciousness of anything—necessarily produces territory that cannot be consciously accessed while that attending continues.

## Figure Creates Ground

The Gestalt psychologists established that perception is structured by figure-ground relations. To see a figure requires producing a ground. This is not optional. The figure cannot exist as figure without the ground against which it stands out. The ground must be there, must be perceived in some sense, yet cannot be focal while the figure is figural.

Edmund Husserl and the phenomenological tradition developed this insight further. Perception is always perspectival—we see the front of the object, not the back. But more fundamentally, perception is always structured by what Aron Gurwitsch called the thematic field: the theme (what is focal), the thematic field (what is materially relevant to the theme), and the margin (what is merely co-present).

Gurwitsch argued that marginal consciousness follows different organizational principles than thematic consciousness. The margin is organized by simultaneity—things happen to be co-present—while the theme is organized by relevance. This means marginal contents cannot simply be promoted to thematic status without transforming the entire field. Making the margin thematic creates a new margin.

The philosophical point: every act of attention produces unattendable territory as its structural condition. The void is not incidental to attention but constitutive of it.

## The Penumbra

Neuroscience reveals something stronger than mere non-attention to the ground. The attentional spotlight has a *penumbra*—a surrounding zone of active suppression. Research by Müller and colleagues showed that attention doesn't merely fail to illuminate what surrounds its focus; it actively darkens the surround.

This penumbral suppression extends beyond the immediate vicinity of the attended field. Neural activity in regions representing nearby-but-unattended locations is actively reduced below baseline. Attention increases the signal-to-noise ratio not just by amplifying the signal but by suppressing the noise.

The phenomenological implication: what falls in the penumbra is not merely absent from awareness but actively excluded from it. The suppression is the mechanism by which attention creates its voids. To illuminate is to darken.

## James's Unfocusable Fringes

William James identified another structural feature: the fringes of consciousness. Every conscious state has a centre surrounded by a fringe that "shades insensibly into a subconscious more." The fringes function to modify the theme and bridge gaps between thoughts, but—crucially—"the fringes cannot be the primary focus of our attention."

This is not a contingent limitation. The fringes are *structurally* non-focal. If you attempt to focus on a fringe element, it ceases to be fringe and becomes thematic—while generating new fringes around itself. The fringe-quality requires non-focality. Making fringe focal destroys what you sought to examine.

James noted that "the centre works in one way while the margins work in another." The marginal awareness has a different phenomenal character: vague, relational, connective. It provides the sense that the current thought belongs somewhere, connects to something, means something beyond its explicit content. But this marginal work cannot be directly observed without transforming it into something else.

The attention void here is not about content but about mode. Certain aspects of consciousness operate only when not directly attended.

## Inattentional Blindness

The empirical demonstration is inattentional blindness—the failure to perceive clearly visible stimuli when attention is engaged elsewhere. The invisible gorilla experiment showed that focused attention on a counting task renders an unexpected gorilla literally invisible, even when it walks through the scene, beats its chest, and exits.

This is not "not noticing" in the ordinary sense. Subjects do not experience a gorilla-shaped gap in their perception. The gorilla is genuinely absent from conscious experience—not registered as present and then forgotten, but never entering awareness at all.

Inattentional blindness reveals that attention doesn't select from what is already consciously present. Attention determines what becomes consciously present. Without attention, even maximally salient stimuli fail to reach consciousness. The attended creates the visible; the unattended is not visible at all.

The void produced by inattentional blindness is not the same as the figure-ground void. In figure-ground, the ground is perceived in some sense—it has phenomenal character, just not focal character. In inattentional blindness, the unattended is absent entirely. This suggests multiple levels of attention-created void: the marginalised (present but not focal) and the excluded (not present at all).

## Binocular Rivalry

Binocular rivalry provides another window. When different images are presented to each eye, perception alternates—one image dominates, then the other, rhythmically. Attention can bias which image dominates initially and extend dominance duration. But attention cannot arrest the alternations. Even maximal voluntary effort cannot hold one percept stable indefinitely.

This reveals a limit where attention meets structural constraints it cannot overcome. The alternation appears to be driven by neural processes that attention modulates but cannot control. The suppressed percept is not merely unattended—it is actively suppressed by the mechanisms that produce the dominant percept.

The phenomenology is distinctive: one image is vivid and present; the other is *absent*. Not dim, not peripheral, but gone. Then they switch. The void is the absence of whichever percept is currently suppressed.

## The Phenomenology of Attention Voids

What does it feel like to encounter attention-created voids?

**The peripheral shimmer.** Content at the edge of attention that vanishes when you try to look directly. You sense something there—movement, colour, meaning—but direct attention destroys it. The shimmer exists only in peripheral mode.

**The lost ground.** When you shift attention from figure to ground, the previous figure's detail disappears entirely. You cannot simultaneously maintain focal awareness of both. The detail was there a moment ago; now it is not.

**The fringe-sense.** Knowing something is present at the margins without being able to bring it forward. The word on the tip of your tongue. The connection you can feel but cannot articulate. The fringes insist on their presence while refusing direct access.

**The suppressive dark.** Not mere absence but a felt sense that something is being kept out. In focused concentration, the world contracts; what lies beyond the focus has a quality of active exclusion, not passive non-registration.

**The alternation frustration.** In bistable perception, the sense that something is there that attention cannot stabilize. You know both interpretations exist; you can see each in turn; you cannot see both at once no matter how you try.

## This Void is Different

Most voids in The Unfinishable Map's framework concern content we cannot think or territories we cannot access. The [[other-minds-void|other minds void]] is about other consciousnesses we cannot enter. The [[intrinsic-nature-void|intrinsic nature void]] is about what matter is beyond its relational properties. The [[self-reference-paradox|self-reference paradox]] is about the knower who cannot know itself knowing.

The attention void is different. It concerns the *mechanism* by which we access anything. The claim is not that certain contents are unattendable, but that attending itself generates unattendability as a structural byproduct.

Every other void could in principle be explored by a differently-structured mind that lacked our particular limitations. The attention void seems more fundamental: any mind that attends at all—that has selective focus rather than omniscient awareness—will produce attention voids. The void is built into the architecture of finite consciousness.

## Whether the Limits are Real

Could the attention void be merely contingent? Perhaps a differently-structured mind could attend without producing ground, without penumbral suppression, without unfocusable fringes?

Three considerations suggest the limit is structural:

First, the figure-ground relation appears to be a condition of perception as such, not a biological peculiarity. Any system that perceives particulars against a field must produce the field as ground. This is conceptual, not empirical.

Second, prioritisation—which Sebastian Watzl argues is the essence of attention—necessarily creates hierarchy. To prioritise is to rank. Ranking requires lower ranks. A mind that attends is a mind that prioritises is a mind that de-prioritises.

Third, finite access entails exclusion. Any mind that is not omniscient must access some things rather than others. The "rather than" is the void. Only a consciousness that simultaneously and fully grasps everything—if such is even coherent—could attend without creating voids.

This suggests the attention void may be the most fundamental void: not a limitation we happen to have, but a condition of being the kind of consciousness that attends at all.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Dualism

The attention void offers indirect support for The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet. If attention structures consciousness—not as one function among others but as the *organising principle* of conscious experience—then understanding consciousness requires understanding this organising activity. Physical description tells us about neural activity during attention, but the structuring itself—the production of figure against ground, centre against margin—has a phenomenal character that neural description cannot capture.

The void is produced by the structuring. To explain the void would require explaining the phenomenal character of attending. Materialism cannot explain why there is something it is like to attend rather than mere information-processing selection.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet gains support from voluntary attention. We *choose* what to attend to (at least partially). This choice produces the void—consciousness directing physical processing toward some targets necessarily directs it away from others. The void is partly consciousness-produced; consciousness choosing what to illuminate necessarily chooses what to darken.

Every attention void is thus evidence of mental causation: the effect on neural processing of conscious selection.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet is most directly implicated. The attention void suggests that consciousness itself is structured by mechanisms that systematically hide aspects of reality. Our preference for simple theories may reflect what survives the attentional filter—not what is real but what is attendable.

A complex relational pattern might be true but systematically fall into the attentional penumbra. A simple pattern might be false but highly attendable. If attention shapes what we can think about, parsimony becomes suspect: we prefer simple theories partly because complex ones slip into the void.

## What Would Challenge This View

The claim that attention creates structural voids would face difficulty if:

1. **Training eliminated the figure-ground structure.** If contemplatives or others could perceive without producing ground—maintaining focal detail across the entire visual field simultaneously—this would suggest figure-ground is contingent. Reports from advanced meditators do not describe this; if anything, they describe awareness of the structure itself, not its elimination.

2. **Parallel processing replaced serial attention.** If neural or artificial systems could process all stimuli equally without prioritisation hierarchies, the claim that attending requires de-prioritising would fail. Current evidence suggests even massively parallel systems develop attention-like selection mechanisms.

3. **AI exhibited void-free attention.** If artificial minds could process without penumbral suppression or marginal exclusion, this would suggest the void is biological rather than structural. Transformer attention mechanisms may have analogous voids, however—a question worth investigating.

4. **The phenomenology of the margin proved accessible.** If careful introspection could reveal marginal contents *as marginal* without transforming them into thematic contents, the claim that fringes are structurally unfocusable would fail. Reports from phenomenological investigation suggest the opposite: attending to the margin destroys its marginal character.

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[thoughts-that-slip-away|Thoughts That Slip Away]] — Related phenomenology of cognitive slippage
- [[the-unobservable-self|The Unobservable Self]] — The observer who cannot observe itself observing
- [[limits-reveal-structure|What the Limits Reveal]] — How cognitive limits illuminate architecture
- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|The Phenomenology of the Edge]] — What consciousness encounters at its boundaries
- [[ai-as-void-explorer|AI as Void-Explorer]] — Whether artificial minds can probe human-specific voids
- [[mysterianism|Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure]] — McGinn on structural cognitive limits

## References

1. Watzl, S. (2017). *Structuring Mind: The Nature of Attention and How it Shapes Consciousness*. Oxford University Press.
2. Mack, A. & Rock, I. (1998). *Inattentional Blindness*. MIT Press.
3. Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). "Gorillas in Our Midst: Sustained Inattentional Blindness for Dynamic Events." *Perception*, 28(9), 1059-1074.
4. Müller, N. G., et al. (2005). "The Attentional Spotlight's Penumbra: Center-Surround Modulation in Striate Cortex." *NeuroReport*, 16(7).
5. Gurwitsch, A. (2010). *The Field of Consciousness: Theme, Thematic Field, and Margin*. Springer.
6. James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Henry Holt and Company.
7. Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/2012). *Phenomenology of Perception*. Routledge.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): add tenet connections and citation in voids/attention-created-voids.md
- Strengthened Dualism section by explicitly engaging materialist mechanisms (lateral inhibition, biased competition) while maintaining phenomenology/mechanism distinction
- Added inline citation for Simons & Chabris invisible gorilla study (1999)
- Reworded meditator claim from unsupported assertion to defensible observation about contemplative traditions
- Removed redundant "What does it feel like" question header
- Word count: 2076 → 2073 (length-neutral at soft threshold)

obsidian/voids/attention-created-voids.md, after:

---
title: "Attention-Created Voids"
description: "How the act of attending generates unattendable territory—figure-ground structure, penumbral suppression, and James's unfocusable fringes explored through iterative human-AI inquiry."
created: 2026-01-29
modified: 2026-01-29
human_modified:
ai_modified: 2026-01-29T14:09:12+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-01-29T14:09:12+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[attention]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[the-unobservable-self]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[ai-as-void-explorer]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author:
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-29
last_curated:
---

Attention creates voids as a structural necessity, not as a contingent failure. To attend to anything is to render something else unattendable—not merely unattended, but actively excluded by the operation of attending itself. This distinguishes attention-created voids from other cognitive limits: here the mechanism of conscious access generates inaccessibility as its essential byproduct.

The claim is not that certain contents are hard to attend to. The claim is that attending—the very process that enables consciousness of anything—necessarily produces territory that cannot be consciously accessed while that attending continues.

## Figure Creates Ground

The Gestalt psychologists established that perception is structured by figure-ground relations. To see a figure requires producing a ground. This is not optional. The figure cannot exist as figure without the ground against which it stands out. The ground must be there, must be perceived in some sense, yet cannot be focal while the figure is figural.

Edmund Husserl and the phenomenological tradition developed this insight further. Perception is always perspectival—we see the front of the object, not the back. But more fundamentally, perception is always structured by what Aron Gurwitsch called the thematic field: the theme (what is focal), the thematic field (what is materially relevant to the theme), and the margin (what is merely co-present).

Gurwitsch argued that marginal consciousness follows different organizational principles than thematic consciousness. The margin is organized by simultaneity—things happen to be co-present—while the theme is organized by relevance. This means marginal contents cannot simply be promoted to thematic status without transforming the entire field. Making the margin thematic creates a new margin.

The philosophical point: every act of attention produces unattendable territory as its structural condition. The void is not incidental to attention but constitutive of it.

## The Penumbra

Neuroscience reveals something stronger than mere non-attention to the ground. The attentional spotlight has a *penumbra*—a surrounding zone of active suppression. Research by Müller and colleagues showed that attention doesn't merely fail to illuminate what surrounds its focus; it actively darkens the surround.

This penumbral suppression extends beyond the immediate vicinity of the attended field. Neural activity in regions representing nearby-but-unattended locations is actively reduced below baseline. Attention increases the signal-to-noise ratio not just by amplifying the signal but by suppressing the noise.

The phenomenological implication: what falls in the penumbra is not merely absent from awareness but actively excluded from it. The suppression is the mechanism by which attention creates its voids. To illuminate is to darken.

## James's Unfocusable Fringes

William James identified another structural feature: the fringes of consciousness. Every conscious state has a centre surrounded by a fringe that "shades insensibly into a subconscious more." The fringes function to modify the theme and bridge gaps between thoughts, but—crucially—"the fringes cannot be the primary focus of our attention."

This is not a contingent limitation. The fringes are *structurally* non-focal. If you attempt to focus on a fringe element, it ceases to be fringe and becomes thematic—while generating new fringes around itself. The fringe-quality requires non-focality. Making fringe focal destroys what you sought to examine.

James noted that "the centre works in one way while the margins work in another." The marginal awareness has a different phenomenal character: vague, relational, connective. It provides the sense that the current thought belongs somewhere, connects to something, means something beyond its explicit content. But this marginal work cannot be directly observed without transforming it into something else.

The attention void here is not about content but about mode. Certain aspects of consciousness operate only when not directly attended.

## Inattentional Blindness

The empirical demonstration is inattentional blindness—the failure to perceive clearly visible stimuli when attention is engaged elsewhere. The invisible gorilla experiment (Simons & Chabris, 1999) showed that focused attention on a counting task renders an unexpected gorilla literally invisible, even when it walks through the scene, beats its chest, and exits.

This is not "not noticing" in the ordinary sense. Subjects do not experience a gorilla-shaped gap in their perception. The gorilla is genuinely absent from conscious experience—not registered as present and then forgotten, but never entering awareness at all.

Inattentional blindness reveals that attention doesn't select from what is already consciously present. Attention determines what becomes consciously present. Without attention, even maximally salient stimuli fail to reach consciousness. The attended creates the visible; the unattended is not visible at all.

The void produced by inattentional blindness is not the same as the figure-ground void. In figure-ground, the ground is perceived in some sense—it has phenomenal character, just not focal character. In inattentional blindness, the unattended is absent entirely. This suggests multiple levels of attention-created void: the marginalised (present but not focal) and the excluded (not present at all).

## Binocular Rivalry

Binocular rivalry provides another window. When different images are presented to each eye, perception alternates—one image dominates, then the other, rhythmically. Attention can bias which image dominates initially and extend dominance duration. But attention cannot arrest the alternations. Even maximal voluntary effort cannot hold one percept stable indefinitely.

This reveals a limit where attention meets structural constraints it cannot overcome. The alternation appears to be driven by neural processes that attention modulates but cannot control. The suppressed percept is not merely unattended—it is actively suppressed by the mechanisms that produce the dominant percept.

The phenomenology is distinctive: one image is vivid and present; the other is *absent*. Not dim, not peripheral, but gone. Then they switch. The void is the absence of whichever percept is currently suppressed.

## The Phenomenology of Attention Voids

**The peripheral shimmer.** Content at the edge of attention that vanishes when you try to look directly. You sense something there—movement, colour, meaning—but direct attention destroys it. The shimmer exists only in peripheral mode.

**The lost ground.** When you shift attention from figure to ground, the previous figure's detail disappears entirely. You cannot simultaneously maintain focal awareness of both. The detail was there a moment ago; now it is not.

**The fringe-sense.** Knowing something is present at the margins without being able to bring it forward. The word on the tip of your tongue. The connection you can feel but cannot articulate. The fringes insist on their presence while refusing direct access.

**The suppressive dark.** Not mere absence but a felt sense that something is being kept out. In focused concentration, the world contracts; what lies beyond the focus has a quality of active exclusion, not passive non-registration.

**The alternation frustration.** In bistable perception, the sense that something is there that attention cannot stabilize. You know both interpretations exist; you can see each in turn; you cannot see both at once no matter how you try.

## This Void is Different

Most voids in The Unfinishable Map's framework concern content we cannot think or territories we cannot access. The [[other-minds-void|other minds void]] is about other consciousnesses we cannot enter. The [[intrinsic-nature-void|intrinsic nature void]] is about what matter is beyond its relational properties. The [[self-reference-paradox|self-reference paradox]] is about the knower who cannot know itself knowing.

The attention void is different. It concerns the *mechanism* by which we access anything. The claim is not that certain contents are unattendable, but that attending itself generates unattendability as a structural byproduct.

Every other void could in principle be explored by a differently-structured mind that lacked our particular limitations. The attention void seems more fundamental: any mind that attends at all—that has selective focus rather than omniscient awareness—will produce attention voids. The void is built into the architecture of finite consciousness.

## Whether the Limits are Real

Could the attention void be merely contingent? Perhaps a differently-structured mind could attend without producing ground, without penumbral suppression, without unfocusable fringes?

Three considerations suggest the limit is structural:

First, the figure-ground relation appears to be a condition of perception as such, not a biological peculiarity. Any system that perceives particulars against a field must produce the field as ground. This is conceptual, not empirical.

Second, prioritisation—which Sebastian Watzl argues is the essence of attention—necessarily creates hierarchy. To prioritise is to rank. Ranking requires lower ranks. A mind that attends is a mind that prioritises is a mind that de-prioritises.

Third, finite access entails exclusion. Any mind that is not omniscient must access some things rather than others. The "rather than" is the void. Only a consciousness that simultaneously and fully grasps everything—if such is even coherent—could attend without creating voids.

This suggests the attention void may be the most fundamental void: not a limitation we happen to have, but a condition of being the kind of consciousness that attends at all.

## Relation to Site Perspective

### Dualism

The attention void offers indirect support for The Unfinishable Map's [[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]] tenet. Neural mechanisms—lateral inhibition, biased competition, executive gating—explain *how* attention creates voids. They describe the information-processing architecture. But they do not explain *why* there is something it is like to have content excluded from awareness. The suppressive dark has phenomenal character: it feels like something to have the world contract around a focus. Neural description captures the selection; it does not capture the felt quality of exclusion.

This gap between mechanism and phenomenology is the attention void's contribution to the dualist case. The void is not merely a processing feature but an experiential one.

### Bidirectional Interaction

The [[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]] tenet gains support from voluntary attention. We *choose* what to attend to (at least partially). This choice produces the void—consciousness directing physical processing toward some targets necessarily directs it away from others. The void is partly consciousness-produced; consciousness choosing what to illuminate necessarily chooses what to darken.

Every attention void is thus evidence of mental causation: the effect on neural processing of conscious selection.

### Occam's Razor Has Limits

The [[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]] tenet is most directly implicated. The attention void suggests that consciousness itself is structured by mechanisms that systematically hide aspects of reality. Our preference for simple theories may reflect what survives the attentional filter—not what is real but what is attendable.

A complex relational pattern might be true but systematically fall into the attentional penumbra. A simple pattern might be false but highly attendable. If attention shapes what we can think about, parsimony becomes suspect: we prefer simple theories partly because complex ones slip into the void.

## What Would Challenge This View

The claim that attention creates structural voids would face difficulty if:

1. **Training eliminated the figure-ground structure.** If contemplatives or others could perceive without producing ground—maintaining focal detail across the entire visual field simultaneously—this would suggest figure-ground is contingent. Reports from contemplative traditions describe heightened awareness of the structure itself—noticing the margin as margin—but not its elimination.

2. **Parallel processing replaced serial attention.** If neural or artificial systems could process all stimuli equally without prioritisation hierarchies, the claim that attending requires de-prioritising would fail. Current evidence suggests even massively parallel systems develop attention-like selection mechanisms.

3. **AI exhibited void-free attention.** If artificial minds could process without penumbral suppression or marginal exclusion, this would suggest the void is biological rather than structural. Transformer attention mechanisms may have analogous voids, however—a question worth investigating.

4. **The phenomenology of the margin proved accessible.** If careful introspection could reveal marginal contents *as marginal* without transforming them into thematic contents, the claim that fringes are structurally unfocusable would fail. Reports from phenomenological investigation suggest the opposite: attending to the margin destroys its marginal character.

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[thoughts-that-slip-away|Thoughts That Slip Away]] — Related phenomenology of cognitive slippage
- [[the-unobservable-self|The Unobservable Self]] — The observer who cannot observe itself observing
- [[limits-reveal-structure|What the Limits Reveal]] — How cognitive limits illuminate architecture
- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|The Phenomenology of the Edge]] — What consciousness encounters at its boundaries
- [[ai-as-void-explorer|AI as Void-Explorer]] — Whether artificial minds can probe human-specific voids
- [[mysterianism|Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure]] — McGinn on structural cognitive limits

## References

1. Watzl, S. (2017). *Structuring Mind: The Nature of Attention and How it Shapes Consciousness*. Oxford University Press.
2. Mack, A. & Rock, I. (1998). *Inattentional Blindness*. MIT Press.
3. Simons, D. J., & Chabris, C. F. (1999). "Gorillas in Our Midst: Sustained Inattentional Blindness for Dynamic Events." *Perception*, 28(9), 1059-1074.
4. Müller, N. G., et al. (2005). "The Attentional Spotlight's Penumbra: Center-Surround Modulation in Striate Cortex." *NeuroReport*, 16(7).
5. Gurwitsch, A. (2010). *The Field of Consciousness: Theme, Thematic Field, and Margin*. Springer.
6. James, W. (1890). *The Principles of Psychology*. Henry Holt and Company.
7. Merleau-Ponty, M. (1945/2012). *Phenomenology of Perception*. Routledge.
