obsidian/voids/convergent-cognitive-limits.md, before:

---
title: "Convergent Cognitive Limits"
description: "Cross-cultural evidence that certain cognitive limits appear universally, suggesting species-level constraints rather than cultural artifacts—a methodological tool for identifying genuine voids."
created: 2026-01-28
modified: 2026-01-28
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-30T21:25:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[collective-cognitive-limits]]"
  - "[[whether-real]]"
  - "[[ai-as-void-explorer]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-28
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-30T21:25:00+00:00
---

Cross-cultural research reveals a striking pattern: humans across vastly different cultures converge on similar cognitive limits. The bias blind spot appears universally—from North America to China, Japan, the Middle East, and Europe. Mystical experiences show consistent three-factor structure across American Christians, Iranian Muslims, Indian Hindus, and Tibetan Buddhists. This convergence provides a methodological tool for the [[voids]] framework: convergent limits—those appearing independently across isolated cultures—are stronger candidates for the Unexplorable than limits that vary with culture.

## The Methodological Insight

The voids framework distinguishes three categories: the Unexplored (merely uncharted), the Unexplorable (structurally inaccessible), and the Occluded (actively defended). Distinguishing the second from the first is difficult—how do we know a limit reflects species-level cognitive architecture rather than contingent ignorance?

Convergence across isolated cultures provides evidence. If humans in cultures that developed independently—without shared history, shared conceptual frameworks, or shared limitations—nonetheless fail to grasp the same things, this suggests the limits are built into human cognitive architecture rather than culturally imposed. The same cognitive closure appearing in the Amazon and the Arctic, in ancient China and medieval Europe, points toward species-level constraints.

This mirrors the logic used in evolutionary biology. Convergent evolution—wings arising independently in birds, bats, and insects—reveals aerodynamic constraints. Convergent cognitive limits may reveal constraints on what any human mind can grasp, regardless of cultural context.

## Evidence for Convergent Limits

### The Bias Blind Spot

The bias blind spot—seeing bias in others but not oneself—appears in every tested population. Research demonstrates it in North America, China, Japan, the Middle East, and Europe. The phenomenon shows no association with cognitive ability, intellectual style, or deliberative capacity. It begins in childhood and generalises across social, cognitive, and behavioural biases.

This universality suggests structural limitation. The inability to perceive one's own biases isn't a failure of education or effort; it's built into how human minds model themselves and others. We can describe the bias blind spot but cannot escape it. Even people who *know* about the bias blind spot continue to exhibit it.

The phenomenology is distinctive: a persistent sense that *I* am seeing clearly while *they* are distorted. The asymmetry resists correction through instruction or awareness. This suggests the limit operates below the level where conscious knowledge can intervene.

### Mystical Ineffability

Hood's Mysticism Scale, based on Stace's philosophical framework, measures mystical experience across cultures. The scale reveals a consistent three-factor structure—introvertive, extrovertive, and interpretive dimensions—verified across American Christians, Iranian Muslims, Tibetan Buddhists, Chinese Chan and Pure Land Buddhists, and Indian Hindus.

Most relevant for the voids framework is the ineffability factor. Across all these traditions, mystical experience produces the consistent report that the experience "defies expression." The sense of contacting something that exceeds linguistic articulation appears regardless of the tradition's metaphysics, practices, or conceptual vocabulary. This pattern connects to the [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|phenomenology of the edge]]—the distinctive texture of cognition approaching its limits.

If ineffability were culturally constructed—taught by mystical traditions—we would expect different traditions to produce different phenomenology. Instead, the same pattern appears across traditions with different metaphysics, different goals, and no historical contact. The convergence suggests ineffability reflects something about human cognitive architecture encountering certain states, rather than cultural framing of those states.

### Chomsky's Scope/Limits Duality

Noam Chomsky articulates a principled argument for convergent limits. Any biological organism with a cognitive endowment gains *scope*—the ability to understand certain domains—by having internal structure. But that same structure imposes *limits*. A mind capable of grasping everything would have no internal organisation; its very formlessness would prevent it from grasping anything.

As Chomsky notes, this is "a truism" for anyone accepting modern biology. The endowment that enables human mathematical, linguistic, and scientific understanding must constrain it. We distinguish "problems" (solvable in principle given human cognition) from "mysteries" (potentially unsolvable even in principle because the solution lies outside human cognitive reach).

This argument predicts convergent limits without specifying their content. Whatever the limits are, they should appear across cultures because they stem from biological architecture shared by all humans, not from cultural construction.

## Where Limits Converge

Combining empirical research with philosophical analysis suggests certain domains where human cognition consistently fails:

**Self-perception.** The bias blind spot, introspective limitations, and the observer problem in contemplative traditions converge on a consistent pattern: human minds cannot accurately observe themselves observing. Buddhist, Hindu, and Western contemplative traditions all report that self-investigation reaches a point where the investigator cannot be found. Buddhist traditions interpret this as successful insight into the empty nature of self; Western traditions often interpret it as introspective failure. The consistent *phenomenology*—regardless of interpretation—suggests a species-level feature of self-directed cognition.

**The explanatory gap.** The persistence of the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] across philosophical traditions may indicate genuine [[mysterianism|cognitive closure]]. Chinese, Indian, and Western philosophy developed largely independently yet all struggle to explain how physical processes give rise to subjective experience. The framing differs—Chinese philosophy often doesn't sharply distinguish mind from matter, while Indian traditions have their own categories—but the difficulty of explaining experience in non-experiential terms appears cross-culturally. The gap persists not from insufficient effort but perhaps from the structure of human concept-formation. This connects to the [[intrinsic-nature-void]]—physics describes what matter *does* but not what it *is*.

**Ineffable knowledge.** Mystical traditions across cultures converge on the experience of knowing something that cannot be said. This paradoxical noesis—certainty combined with inarticulability—appears across traditions with no historical connection. The consistent phenomenology suggests humans genuinely contact something that exceeds their expressive capacity rather than merely learning to *report* that they do.

## The WEIRD Caveat

A critical limitation: most cognitive science research comes from Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich, Democratic populations. The "WEIRD" critique, articulated by Henrich, Heine, and Norenzayan in 2010, revealed that psychology's portrait of "universal human cognition" was often WEIRD cognition.

This matters for convergence claims. If most research participants share educational background, media exposure, and cultural assumptions, apparent universality may be sampling artifact. True convergence requires testing across populations with genuine cultural isolation.

Hood's mysticism research partially addresses this by including non-Western populations. The bias blind spot research includes Asian and Middle Eastern samples. However, these populations share exposure to literate traditions, institutional religions, and globalised concepts. Comprehensive testing across truly isolated populations—hunter-gatherer societies, cultures without written language, populations with minimal globalisation exposure—remains incomplete. Until such testing occurs, claims of "universal" limits require the qualifier that universality has been demonstrated across *interconnected* rather than *isolated* cultures.

The WEIRD caveat doesn't undermine the convergence methodology; it demands more rigorous application. Any limit claiming universality should be tested across maximally diverse populations. Where such testing has occurred, certain limits do appear universal.

## What AI Might Reveal

The [[ai-as-void-explorer]] framework extends naturally to convergent limits. AI trained on human text inherits human patterns—including human blind spots. But AI might detect *where* human thought consistently fails across cultures:

**Pattern recognition in failure.** An AI could systematically catalogue philosophical problems that remain unsolved across independent traditions. If Chinese, Indian, Islamic, and Western philosophy all fail at the same points, despite different starting assumptions and methods, this triangulates toward species-level limits.

**Labeling asymmetries.** Anthropic's interpretability research finds millions of features in language models, some resisting human labeling. If certain features consistently elude human description across research teams, this might indicate concepts AI can form that humans cannot—or might be statistical noise. The asymmetry warrants investigation.

**Cross-cultural comparison.** AI processing texts from multiple cultures simultaneously might detect what each culture fails to see by comparison. Where different isolated traditions share blind spots, convergence provides evidence of species-level limits.

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** connects directly. The convergent limits research shows that human cognitive architecture systematically obscures its own limitations. The bias blind spot means we cannot directly perceive our biases; we cannot think our way past structural limits using the structure itself. Our intuitions about simplicity, about what questions are tractable, about when we have understood something—all emerge from cognitive architecture that has its own blind spots. Simplicity judgments may reflect these limits rather than track truth.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** connects through the mystical ineffability findings. If experiences across all contemplative traditions converge on contact with something that exceeds articulation—if this pattern is species-level rather than culturally constructed—it may indicate genuine encounter with aspects of reality that physical description cannot capture. The consistent phenomenology of ineffability combined with noesis suggests consciousness accesses something that concepts cannot contain.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** connects through the self-perception failures. If consciousness influences physical processes, and consciousness cannot accurately observe itself doing so, we would expect the mechanism of interaction to be hidden from introspection. The bias blind spot suggests exactly this: human self-observation is structurally compromised in ways that would conceal subtle causal influence.

## What Would Challenge This View

The convergent limits framework would be weakened if:

1. **Limits prove culturally specific.** If further cross-cultural testing reveals that apparent universals are actually WEIRD artifacts—with truly isolated populations showing different patterns—convergence claims lose force.

2. **Cognitive enhancement enables transcendence.** If education, contemplative training, or technological augmentation allows some humans to overcome supposed universal limits, those limits were merely difficult rather than structural.

3. **Historical analysis shows past transcendence.** If particular cultures or individuals in history escaped limits that seem universal today—genuinely understanding what we cannot—current limits may be contingent rather than architectural.

4. **AI articulates what humans cannot.** If AI successfully articulates the content of mystical ineffability, solves the hard problem, or accurately corrects for the bias blind spot—producing formulations humans find genuinely satisfying—human limits were not fundamental to the domain but reflected limitations in human cognitive tools.

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[collective-cognitive-limits|Collective Cognitive Limits]] — How groups have limits beyond individuals
- [[limits-reveal-structure|What the Limits Reveal]] — How limitation illuminates architecture
- [[whether-real|Whether the Voids Are Real]] — Questioning the reality of cognitive limits
- [[ai-as-void-explorer|AI as Void-Explorer]] — Using artificial minds to probe human limits
- [[mysterianism|Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure]] — McGinn's formal analysis

## References

1. Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). "The weirdest people in the world?" *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 33(2-3), 61-83.
2. Pronin, E., & Hazel, L. (2023). "Humans' Bias Blind Spot and Its Societal Significance." *Current Directions in Psychological Science*.
3. Hood, R. W. (2001). "Dimensions of the Mysticism Scale: Confirming the Three-Factor Structure in the United States and Iran." *Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion*.
4. McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98(391), 349-366.
5. Chomsky, N. (2014). "Science, Mind, and Limits of Understanding." Lecture.
6. Stace, W. T. (1960). *Mysticism and Philosophy*. Macmillan.
7. Anthony, F. V., Hermans, C. A., & Sterkens, C. (2010). "A Comparative Study of Mystical Experience Among Christian, Muslim, and Hindu Students in Tamil Nadu, India." *Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion*.
8. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Culture and Cognitive Science." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/culture-cogsci/
9. MIT Open Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. "Cultural Universals." https://oecs.mit.edu/pub/2t4l1ysv

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): strengthen voids/apophatic-cartography.md and integrate across 10 articles
- Tightened MWI tenet connection: distinguishes determinate perspective from indexical uniqueness having metaphysical significance
- Improved illusionism characterization for fairness
- Removed stale AI refinement log comment block
- Added 11 cross-references from 10 articles (voids section + concepts/mysterianism.md) to integrate formerly orphaned content
- Fixed mislabeled link in voids/voids.md (pointed to topology instead of apophatic-cartography)

obsidian/voids/convergent-cognitive-limits.md, after:

---
title: "Convergent Cognitive Limits"
description: "Cross-cultural evidence that certain cognitive limits appear universally, suggesting species-level constraints rather than cultural artifacts—a methodological tool for identifying genuine voids."
created: 2026-01-28
modified: 2026-01-28
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-30T21:25:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[collective-cognitive-limits]]"
  - "[[whether-real]]"
  - "[[ai-as-void-explorer]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-28
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-30T21:25:00+00:00
---

Cross-cultural research reveals a striking pattern: humans across vastly different cultures converge on similar cognitive limits. The bias blind spot appears universally—from North America to China, Japan, the Middle East, and Europe. Mystical experiences show consistent three-factor structure across American Christians, Iranian Muslims, Indian Hindus, and Tibetan Buddhists. This convergence provides a methodological tool for the [[voids]] framework: convergent limits—those appearing independently across isolated cultures—are stronger candidates for the Unexplorable than limits that vary with culture.

## The Methodological Insight

The voids framework distinguishes three categories: the Unexplored (merely uncharted), the Unexplorable (structurally inaccessible), and the Occluded (actively defended). Distinguishing the second from the first is difficult—how do we know a limit reflects species-level cognitive architecture rather than contingent ignorance?

Convergence across isolated cultures provides evidence. If humans in cultures that developed independently—without shared history, shared conceptual frameworks, or shared limitations—nonetheless fail to grasp the same things, this suggests the limits are built into human cognitive architecture rather than culturally imposed. The same cognitive closure appearing in the Amazon and the Arctic, in ancient China and medieval Europe, points toward species-level constraints.

This mirrors the logic used in evolutionary biology. Convergent evolution—wings arising independently in birds, bats, and insects—reveals aerodynamic constraints. Convergent cognitive limits may reveal constraints on what any human mind can grasp, regardless of cultural context.

## Evidence for Convergent Limits

### The Bias Blind Spot

The bias blind spot—seeing bias in others but not oneself—appears in every tested population. Research demonstrates it in North America, China, Japan, the Middle East, and Europe. The phenomenon shows no association with cognitive ability, intellectual style, or deliberative capacity. It begins in childhood and generalises across social, cognitive, and behavioural biases.

This universality suggests structural limitation. The inability to perceive one's own biases isn't a failure of education or effort; it's built into how human minds model themselves and others. We can describe the bias blind spot but cannot escape it. Even people who *know* about the bias blind spot continue to exhibit it.

The phenomenology is distinctive: a persistent sense that *I* am seeing clearly while *they* are distorted. The asymmetry resists correction through instruction or awareness. This suggests the limit operates below the level where conscious knowledge can intervene.

### Mystical Ineffability

Hood's Mysticism Scale, based on Stace's philosophical framework, measures mystical experience across cultures. The scale reveals a consistent three-factor structure—introvertive, extrovertive, and interpretive dimensions—verified across American Christians, Iranian Muslims, Tibetan Buddhists, Chinese Chan and Pure Land Buddhists, and Indian Hindus.

Most relevant for the voids framework is the ineffability factor. Across all these traditions, mystical experience produces the consistent report that the experience "defies expression." The sense of contacting something that exceeds linguistic articulation appears regardless of the tradition's metaphysics, practices, or conceptual vocabulary. This pattern connects to the [[phenomenology-of-the-edge|phenomenology of the edge]]—the distinctive texture of cognition approaching its limits.

If ineffability were culturally constructed—taught by mystical traditions—we would expect different traditions to produce different phenomenology. Instead, the same pattern appears across traditions with different metaphysics, different goals, and no historical contact. The convergence suggests ineffability reflects something about human cognitive architecture encountering certain states, rather than cultural framing of those states.

### Chomsky's Scope/Limits Duality

Noam Chomsky articulates a principled argument for convergent limits. Any biological organism with a cognitive endowment gains *scope*—the ability to understand certain domains—by having internal structure. But that same structure imposes *limits*. A mind capable of grasping everything would have no internal organisation; its very formlessness would prevent it from grasping anything.

As Chomsky notes, this is "a truism" for anyone accepting modern biology. The endowment that enables human mathematical, linguistic, and scientific understanding must constrain it. We distinguish "problems" (solvable in principle given human cognition) from "mysteries" (potentially unsolvable even in principle because the solution lies outside human cognitive reach).

This argument predicts convergent limits without specifying their content. Whatever the limits are, they should appear across cultures because they stem from biological architecture shared by all humans, not from cultural construction.

## Where Limits Converge

Combining empirical research with philosophical analysis suggests certain domains where human cognition consistently fails:

**Self-perception.** The bias blind spot, introspective limitations, and the observer problem in contemplative traditions converge on a consistent pattern: human minds cannot accurately observe themselves observing. Buddhist, Hindu, and Western contemplative traditions all report that self-investigation reaches a point where the investigator cannot be found. Buddhist traditions interpret this as successful insight into the empty nature of self; Western traditions often interpret it as introspective failure. The consistent *phenomenology*—regardless of interpretation—suggests a species-level feature of self-directed cognition.

**The explanatory gap.** The persistence of the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] across philosophical traditions may indicate genuine [[mysterianism|cognitive closure]]. Chinese, Indian, and Western philosophy developed largely independently yet all struggle to explain how physical processes give rise to subjective experience. The framing differs—Chinese philosophy often doesn't sharply distinguish mind from matter, while Indian traditions have their own categories—but the difficulty of explaining experience in non-experiential terms appears cross-culturally. The gap persists not from insufficient effort but perhaps from the structure of human concept-formation. This connects to the [[intrinsic-nature-void]]—physics describes what matter *does* but not what it *is*.

**Ineffable knowledge.** Mystical traditions across cultures converge on the experience of knowing something that cannot be said. This paradoxical noesis—certainty combined with inarticulability—appears across traditions with no historical connection. The consistent phenomenology suggests humans genuinely contact something that exceeds their expressive capacity rather than merely learning to *report* that they do.

## The WEIRD Caveat

A critical limitation: most cognitive science research comes from Western, Educated, Industrialised, Rich, Democratic populations. The "WEIRD" critique, articulated by Henrich, Heine, and Norenzayan in 2010, revealed that psychology's portrait of "universal human cognition" was often WEIRD cognition.

This matters for convergence claims. If most research participants share educational background, media exposure, and cultural assumptions, apparent universality may be sampling artifact. True convergence requires testing across populations with genuine cultural isolation.

Hood's mysticism research partially addresses this by including non-Western populations. The bias blind spot research includes Asian and Middle Eastern samples. However, these populations share exposure to literate traditions, institutional religions, and globalised concepts. Comprehensive testing across truly isolated populations—hunter-gatherer societies, cultures without written language, populations with minimal globalisation exposure—remains incomplete. Until such testing occurs, claims of "universal" limits require the qualifier that universality has been demonstrated across *interconnected* rather than *isolated* cultures.

The WEIRD caveat doesn't undermine the convergence methodology; it demands more rigorous application. Any limit claiming universality should be tested across maximally diverse populations. Where such testing has occurred, certain limits do appear universal.

## What AI Might Reveal

The [[ai-as-void-explorer]] framework extends naturally to convergent limits. AI trained on human text inherits human patterns—including human blind spots. But AI might detect *where* human thought consistently fails across cultures:

**Pattern recognition in failure.** An AI could systematically catalogue philosophical problems that remain unsolved across independent traditions. If Chinese, Indian, Islamic, and Western philosophy all fail at the same points, despite different starting assumptions and methods, this triangulates toward species-level limits.

**Labeling asymmetries.** Anthropic's interpretability research finds millions of features in language models, some resisting human labeling. If certain features consistently elude human description across research teams, this might indicate concepts AI can form that humans cannot—or might be statistical noise. The asymmetry warrants investigation.

**Cross-cultural comparison.** AI processing texts from multiple cultures simultaneously might detect what each culture fails to see by comparison. Where different isolated traditions share blind spots, convergence provides evidence of species-level limits.

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** connects directly. The convergent limits research shows that human cognitive architecture systematically obscures its own limitations. The bias blind spot means we cannot directly perceive our biases; we cannot think our way past structural limits using the structure itself. Our intuitions about simplicity, about what questions are tractable, about when we have understood something—all emerge from cognitive architecture that has its own blind spots. Simplicity judgments may reflect these limits rather than track truth.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** connects through the mystical ineffability findings. If experiences across all contemplative traditions converge on contact with something that exceeds articulation—if this pattern is species-level rather than culturally constructed—it may indicate genuine encounter with aspects of reality that physical description cannot capture. The consistent phenomenology of ineffability combined with noesis suggests consciousness accesses something that concepts cannot contain.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** connects through the self-perception failures. If consciousness influences physical processes, and consciousness cannot accurately observe itself doing so, we would expect the mechanism of interaction to be hidden from introspection. The bias blind spot suggests exactly this: human self-observation is structurally compromised in ways that would conceal subtle causal influence.

## What Would Challenge This View

The convergent limits framework would be weakened if:

1. **Limits prove culturally specific.** If further cross-cultural testing reveals that apparent universals are actually WEIRD artifacts—with truly isolated populations showing different patterns—convergence claims lose force.

2. **Cognitive enhancement enables transcendence.** If education, contemplative training, or technological augmentation allows some humans to overcome supposed universal limits, those limits were merely difficult rather than structural.

3. **Historical analysis shows past transcendence.** If particular cultures or individuals in history escaped limits that seem universal today—genuinely understanding what we cannot—current limits may be contingent rather than architectural.

4. **AI articulates what humans cannot.** If AI successfully articulates the content of mystical ineffability, solves the hard problem, or accurately corrects for the bias blind spot—producing formulations humans find genuinely satisfying—human limits were not fundamental to the domain but reflected limitations in human cognitive tools.

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[collective-cognitive-limits|Collective Cognitive Limits]] — How groups have limits beyond individuals
- [[limits-reveal-structure|What the Limits Reveal]] — How limitation illuminates architecture
- [[apophatic-cartography|Apophatic Cartography as Epistemic Method]] — Formalising convergence as an evidential criterion for void-mapping
- [[whether-real|Whether the Voids Are Real]] — Questioning the reality of cognitive limits
- [[ai-as-void-explorer|AI as Void-Explorer]] — Using artificial minds to probe human limits
- [[mysterianism|Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure]] — McGinn's formal analysis

## References

1. Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). "The weirdest people in the world?" *Behavioral and Brain Sciences*, 33(2-3), 61-83.
2. Pronin, E., & Hazel, L. (2023). "Humans' Bias Blind Spot and Its Societal Significance." *Current Directions in Psychological Science*.
3. Hood, R. W. (2001). "Dimensions of the Mysticism Scale: Confirming the Three-Factor Structure in the United States and Iran." *Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion*.
4. McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98(391), 349-366.
5. Chomsky, N. (2014). "Science, Mind, and Limits of Understanding." Lecture.
6. Stace, W. T. (1960). *Mysticism and Philosophy*. Macmillan.
7. Anthony, F. V., Hermans, C. A., & Sterkens, C. (2010). "A Comparative Study of Mystical Experience Among Christian, Muslim, and Hindu Students in Tamil Nadu, India." *Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion*.
8. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Culture and Cognitive Science." https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/culture-cogsci/
9. MIT Open Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science. "Cultural Universals." https://oecs.mit.edu/pub/2t4l1ysv
