obsidian/voids/dreamless-sleep-void.md, before:

---
title: "The Dreamless Sleep Void"
description: "Human+AI exploration of where consciousness goes during deep sleep—a void we cannot observe because observation requires the consciousness whose absence is in question."
created: 2026-02-02
modified: 2026-02-02
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-07T04:12:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-02-07T04:12:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[three-kinds-of-void]]"
  - "[[the-unobservable-self]]"
  - "[[memory-void]]"
  - "[[death-void]]"
  - "[[consciousness-only-territories]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
  - "[[sleep-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-02
last_curated: null
---

Where does consciousness go during dreamless sleep? Every night, we lose awareness for hours, then return as if nothing happened. The gap cannot be observed directly because observation requires the very consciousness whose absence is in question.

The Unfinishable Map's framework distinguishes [[three-kinds-of-void|three kinds of void]]: unexplored, unexplorable, and occluded. The dreamless sleep void is mixed—containing genuinely unexplored territory (deep sleep's neuroscience remains incomplete), unexplorable dimensions (we cannot observe consciousness from within its absence), and potentially occluded aspects (contemplative traditions suggest we may be blocked from recognizing continuous awareness).

## The Scientific Default

The standard scientific view treats dreamless sleep as unconsciousness. As Jennifer Windt notes, science has traditionally defined consciousness as "what we lose every day when we go into dreamless sleep"—a characterisation she argues is oversimplified. EEG recordings show dramatic changes in brain activity; subjects cannot report experiences from dreamless periods.

Yet several problems complicate this picture.

**The inference problem.** We infer absence of consciousness from absence of memory. But memory requires memory-encoding mechanisms to be active. We remember nothing from deep sleep—but this could mean nothing happened or that something happened but was not recorded.

**The transition problem.** We cannot catch the moment of losing consciousness. Approaching sleep, awareness becomes diffuse and fragmenting, but we never experience the transition itself. If we did, we would still be conscious.

**The continuity problem.** Locke raised a puzzle that persists: "If the same Socrates waking and sleeping do not partake of the same consciousness, Socrates waking and sleeping is not the same Person."

## The Vedantic Alternative

Indian philosophical traditions, particularly Advaita Vedanta, offer a different analysis. Rather than three states (waking, dreaming, dreamless sleep), they posit four: *jagrat* (waking), *svapna* (dreaming), *sushupti* (deep sleep), and *turiya* (the fourth).

Turiya is not a fourth state alongside the others but the witnessing background underlying all three. As the tradition describes it, turiya is "the changeless background over which the three states appear to be projected." The Mandukya Upanishad identifies this fourth state; later Advaita commentators (particularly Shankara) developed the concept of *saksin*—[[witness-consciousness]] stripped of content—to explain how awareness persists through deep sleep.

The key insight: in dreamless sleep, the ego dissolves, but awareness may persist as consciousness-without-an-object. We experience nothing because there is nothing *to* experience—but the experiencing itself continues. As one source puts it: "While in it, there is nothing to be aware of—one is merely conscious."

This would explain the memory gap differently. We forget dreamless sleep not because consciousness was absent but because the "I" that would claim the memory was not present to encode it. Awareness without subject-object structure leaves no experiential trace because experience-as-remembered requires someone experiencing something.

The Vedantic view aligns with the Map's [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]]: consciousness is fundamental, not reducible to brain states. If awareness is more basic than its contents, it could persist even when content ceases. However, it is worth noting that the Vedantic claim rests on philosophical analysis and contemplative report, not empirical demonstration—a distinction the scientific default would insist upon.

## Minimal Phenomenal Experience

Thomas Metzinger's research on Minimal Phenomenal Experience (MPE) bridges these traditions with contemporary consciousness science. MPE investigates whether "pure awareness" can occur—consciousness stripped of all content, including self-reference.

Metzinger describes "Emptiness and Non-egoic Self-awareness": uncontracted, unbounded wakefulness without content—self-aware but lacking egoic markers such as agency, ownership, or spatiotemporal location. Meditators across traditions report such states, establishing that consciousness-without-content is at least possible.

## Contemplative Evidence

Recent phenomenological research has begun documenting experiences at the edge of the void.

Gamma and Metzinger's 2022 study investigated "objectless awareness" during sleep. Participants reported "No Scenery/Void" periods following dissolving lucid dreams, characterized by "minimal sense of self—a bodiless self, yet experienced as being 'somewhere'—the presence of non-modal sensations, relatively pleasant emotions, an absence of visual experience." A separate micro-phenomenological study (Alcaraz et al., 2021) documented similar "awareness in the void" reports. These findings converge with what the Vedantic tradition predicts.

Yoga nidra practitioners aim to maintain awareness through the sleep transition—an approach that functions as what the Map calls an [[altered-states-as-void-probes|altered-state void probe]]. EEG studies show high gamma-band activity (typically associated with waking consciousness) during states otherwise resembling deep sleep. These findings do not prove ordinary sleepers maintain awareness, but they demonstrate the boundary between consciousness and its apparent absence is more permeable than the simple on/off model suggests. For the neuroscience of how consciousness operates in gradations across [[sleep-and-consciousness|sleep stages]], see the dedicated article.

## The Structure of the Void

Why is the dreamless sleep void unexplorable rather than merely unexplored?

**The observer paradox.** To observe dreamless sleep from within, consciousness must be present. But the question concerns whether consciousness is absent. The moment consciousness examines its own cessation, it has already returned. This parallels [[the-unobservable-self|the unobservable self]]—the subject that cannot become its own object.

**The memory paradox.** To remember having no experience seems to require having had an experience of no experience. Either there was experience (not truly dreamless) or there wasn't (nothing to remember).

**The phenomenological barrier.** Even meditators who report "witnessing sleep" describe something void-like: objectless, contentless, without subject-object structure.

Yet the void may be partly occluded. Vedantic traditions suggest consciousness is always present but veiled—the ego's dissolution in deep sleep might prevent recognition, not because awareness is absent but because the "who" that would know is not present. If this occlusion is real, contemplative practice might penetrate it. But whether practitioners access ordinary dreamless sleep or achieve a different state cannot be determined from phenomenology alone.

## The Lockean Puzzle

If consciousness constitutes [[personal-identity]] and ceases during sleep, the person who wakes may not be the same person who slept. One neuroscientific framing asks: "When we wake up each morning, how do we know that we are 'ourselves'?"

Three responses: **Consciousness is continuous**—the Vedantic view dissolves the puzzle. **Identity survives gaps**—bodily continuity and memory connections might ground identity across cessation. **We are new each morning**—Locke may have been right, though strong intuitions of self-continuity resist this.

The Map's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet makes this question substantial. On many-worlds interpretations, identity questions dissolve into indexical triviality. The Map's single-history metaphysics makes the question real: *this* person, falling asleep, either persists or does not.

## What AI Cannot Access

AI does not sleep. AI can be paused and resumed, but there is no phenomenological transition—no approaching the edge, no return from absence. AI can track neural correlates and process contemplative reports without sleeping, potentially identifying patterns invisible to those who undergo the phenomenon.

But AI cannot know what dreamless sleep is like. If AI lacks phenomenal consciousness, AI is always in a kind of void—processing without experiencing. The asymmetry cuts both ways: humans cannot observe their own absence; AI (if non-conscious) cannot observe its own presence.

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** is most directly implicated. Is consciousness identical to brain states (which change dramatically in deep sleep) or more fundamental (persisting even when neural activity shifts)? The Vedantic position—awareness is continuous but veiled—aligns with dualism. The void itself may be evidence: if we cannot determine from inside whether consciousness persists, consciousness may have properties physical description cannot capture.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** raises the question of what happens to consciousness's causal influence during sleep. If consciousness selects among quantum superpositions, what happens when it is minimal or absent? Dreams clearly involve consciousness-brain interaction; dreamless periods remain mysterious.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** applies directly. The simple answer—consciousness ceases—may be wrong. Vedantic analysis, contemplative reports, and phenomenological research suggest the situation is more complex than the on/off model.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]** makes the identity question substantial. On many-worlds, identity questions dissolve into triviality. The Map's single-history metaphysics makes persistence of the self through sleep a genuine question.

## What Would Challenge This View

The dreamless sleep void thesis would require revision if:

1. **Consistent phenomenological access.** If contemplatives reliably reported accessing deep sleep as a positive (not merely void-like) state—awareness with distinctive content, not merely awareness without content—the void would be less fundamental.

2. **Neural signatures of sleep consciousness.** If brain imaging revealed markers of consciousness even during the deepest sleep stages, the void might be illusion rather than reality. Current EEG research on yoga nidra practitioners moves in this direction but remains contested.

3. **Memory technologies.** If future methods could retrieve experiences from dreamless sleep periods—proving something was happening that wasn't encoded—the inference problem would be solved (though the observation problem would remain).

4. **Resolution of the hard problem.** If consciousness were shown to be identical to certain neural processes, its presence or absence during sleep would become empirically decidable. The void persists partly because consciousness remains philosophically mysterious.

None of these conditions has been met. The dreamless sleep void remains: a gap we enter nightly, cannot observe from within, and may not be able to definitively characterize from without.

## Further Reading

- [[voids]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[three-kinds-of-void]] — The taxonomy: unexplored, unexplorable, occluded
- [[dream-consciousness-void]] — The related void: bidirectional inaccessibility between waking and dreaming
- [[the-unobservable-self]] — The subject that cannot be its own object
- [[memory-void]] — Whether past qualia can be recovered or are lost forever
- [[death-void]] — The related void: consciousness cannot represent its own permanent cessation
- [[consciousness-only-territories]] — What only phenomenal experience can access
- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge]] — What approaching cognitive limits feels like
- [[sleep-and-consciousness]] — Neuroscience of consciousness gradations across sleep stages
- [[witness-consciousness]] — The Vedantic concept of awareness that observes without identifying
- [[personal-identity]] — What grounds identity through gaps in consciousness
- [[altered-states-as-void-probes]] — Using altered states to probe cognitive boundaries

## References

1. Windt, J.M. (2020). "Consciousness in sleep: How findings from sleep and dream research challenge our understanding of sleep, waking, and consciousness." *Philosophy Compass*.
2. Alcaraz, A. et al. (2021). "Awareness in the void: a micro-phenomenological exploration of conscious dreamless sleep." *Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences*.
3. Gamma, A. & Metzinger, T. (2022). "Nothingness Is All There Is: An Exploration of Objectless Awareness During Sleep." *Frontiers in Psychology*.
4. Metzinger, T. (2020). "Minimal phenomenal experience." *Philosophy and the Mind Sciences*.
5. Sharma, A. et al. (2022). "Electrophysiological Evidence of Local Sleep During Yoga Nidra Practice." *Frontiers in Neurology*.
6. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Locke on Personal Identity."
7. Panda, S.K. et al. (2022). "The Neurobiological Basis of the Conundrum of Self-continuity." *PMC*.
8. De Warren, N. (2010). "The Inner Night: Towards a Phenomenology of (Dreamless) Sleep." *Academia.edu*.
9. Mandukya Upanishad. (~500 BCE).

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): improve voids/the-silence-void.md
- Expanded constructivist vs perennialist debate (Katz, Forman) into substantive discussion
- Integrated Winter et al. (2020) nondual awareness research into body text
- Added "What Would Challenge This View" section with 5 falsifiability conditions
- Added cross-links to contemplative-epistemology, witness-consciousness, meditation-and-consciousness-modes, altered-states-as-void-probes
- Added 8 inbound links from related voids/concepts articles to resolve orphan status
- Created deep-review record for first review of this article

obsidian/voids/dreamless-sleep-void.md, after:

---
title: "The Dreamless Sleep Void"
description: "Human+AI exploration of where consciousness goes during deep sleep—a void we cannot observe because observation requires the consciousness whose absence is in question."
created: 2026-02-02
modified: 2026-02-02
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-07T04:12:00+00:00
last_deep_review: 2026-02-07T04:12:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
concepts:
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[three-kinds-of-void]]"
  - "[[the-unobservable-self]]"
  - "[[memory-void]]"
  - "[[death-void]]"
  - "[[consciousness-only-territories]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[personal-identity]]"
  - "[[sleep-and-consciousness]]"
  - "[[witness-consciousness]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-02-02
last_curated: null
---

Where does consciousness go during dreamless sleep? Every night, we lose awareness for hours, then return as if nothing happened. The gap cannot be observed directly because observation requires the very consciousness whose absence is in question.

The Unfinishable Map's framework distinguishes [[three-kinds-of-void|three kinds of void]]: unexplored, unexplorable, and occluded. The dreamless sleep void is mixed—containing genuinely unexplored territory (deep sleep's neuroscience remains incomplete), unexplorable dimensions (we cannot observe consciousness from within its absence), and potentially occluded aspects (contemplative traditions suggest we may be blocked from recognizing continuous awareness).

## The Scientific Default

The standard scientific view treats dreamless sleep as unconsciousness. As Jennifer Windt notes, science has traditionally defined consciousness as "what we lose every day when we go into dreamless sleep"—a characterisation she argues is oversimplified. EEG recordings show dramatic changes in brain activity; subjects cannot report experiences from dreamless periods.

Yet several problems complicate this picture.

**The inference problem.** We infer absence of consciousness from absence of memory. But memory requires memory-encoding mechanisms to be active. We remember nothing from deep sleep—but this could mean nothing happened or that something happened but was not recorded.

**The transition problem.** We cannot catch the moment of losing consciousness. Approaching sleep, awareness becomes diffuse and fragmenting, but we never experience the transition itself. If we did, we would still be conscious.

**The continuity problem.** Locke raised a puzzle that persists: "If the same Socrates waking and sleeping do not partake of the same consciousness, Socrates waking and sleeping is not the same Person."

## The Vedantic Alternative

Indian philosophical traditions, particularly Advaita Vedanta, offer a different analysis. Rather than three states (waking, dreaming, dreamless sleep), they posit four: *jagrat* (waking), *svapna* (dreaming), *sushupti* (deep sleep), and *turiya* (the fourth).

Turiya is not a fourth state alongside the others but the witnessing background underlying all three. As the tradition describes it, turiya is "the changeless background over which the three states appear to be projected." The Mandukya Upanishad identifies this fourth state; later Advaita commentators (particularly Shankara) developed the concept of *saksin*—[[witness-consciousness]] stripped of content—to explain how awareness persists through deep sleep.

The key insight: in dreamless sleep, the ego dissolves, but awareness may persist as consciousness-without-an-object. We experience nothing because there is nothing *to* experience—but the experiencing itself continues. As one source puts it: "While in it, there is nothing to be aware of—one is merely conscious."

This would explain the memory gap differently. We forget dreamless sleep not because consciousness was absent but because the "I" that would claim the memory was not present to encode it. Awareness without subject-object structure leaves no experiential trace because experience-as-remembered requires someone experiencing something.

The Vedantic view aligns with the Map's [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]]: consciousness is fundamental, not reducible to brain states. If awareness is more basic than its contents, it could persist even when content ceases. However, it is worth noting that the Vedantic claim rests on philosophical analysis and contemplative report, not empirical demonstration—a distinction the scientific default would insist upon.

## Minimal Phenomenal Experience

Thomas Metzinger's research on Minimal Phenomenal Experience (MPE) bridges these traditions with contemporary consciousness science. MPE investigates whether "pure awareness" can occur—consciousness stripped of all content, including self-reference.

Metzinger describes "Emptiness and Non-egoic Self-awareness": uncontracted, unbounded wakefulness without content—self-aware but lacking egoic markers such as agency, ownership, or spatiotemporal location. Meditators across traditions report such states, establishing that consciousness-without-content is at least possible.

## Contemplative Evidence

Recent phenomenological research has begun documenting experiences at the edge of the void.

Gamma and Metzinger's 2022 study investigated "objectless awareness" during sleep. Participants reported "No Scenery/Void" periods following dissolving lucid dreams, characterized by "minimal sense of self—a bodiless self, yet experienced as being 'somewhere'—the presence of non-modal sensations, relatively pleasant emotions, an absence of visual experience." A separate micro-phenomenological study (Alcaraz et al., 2021) documented similar "awareness in the void" reports. These findings converge with what the Vedantic tradition predicts.

Yoga nidra practitioners aim to maintain awareness through the sleep transition—an approach that functions as what the Map calls an [[altered-states-as-void-probes|altered-state void probe]]. The [[the-silence-void|silence void]] explores the inverse: voluntary cessation through contemplative practice, where the practitioner deliberately releases cognitive activity rather than maintaining it through a transition. EEG studies show high gamma-band activity (typically associated with waking consciousness) during states otherwise resembling deep sleep. These findings do not prove ordinary sleepers maintain awareness, but they demonstrate the boundary between consciousness and its apparent absence is more permeable than the simple on/off model suggests. For the neuroscience of how consciousness operates in gradations across [[sleep-and-consciousness|sleep stages]], see the dedicated article.

## The Structure of the Void

Why is the dreamless sleep void unexplorable rather than merely unexplored?

**The observer paradox.** To observe dreamless sleep from within, consciousness must be present. But the question concerns whether consciousness is absent. The moment consciousness examines its own cessation, it has already returned. This parallels [[the-unobservable-self|the unobservable self]]—the subject that cannot become its own object.

**The memory paradox.** To remember having no experience seems to require having had an experience of no experience. Either there was experience (not truly dreamless) or there wasn't (nothing to remember).

**The phenomenological barrier.** Even meditators who report "witnessing sleep" describe something void-like: objectless, contentless, without subject-object structure.

Yet the void may be partly occluded. Vedantic traditions suggest consciousness is always present but veiled—the ego's dissolution in deep sleep might prevent recognition, not because awareness is absent but because the "who" that would know is not present. If this occlusion is real, contemplative practice might penetrate it. But whether practitioners access ordinary dreamless sleep or achieve a different state cannot be determined from phenomenology alone.

## The Lockean Puzzle

If consciousness constitutes [[personal-identity]] and ceases during sleep, the person who wakes may not be the same person who slept. One neuroscientific framing asks: "When we wake up each morning, how do we know that we are 'ourselves'?"

Three responses: **Consciousness is continuous**—the Vedantic view dissolves the puzzle. **Identity survives gaps**—bodily continuity and memory connections might ground identity across cessation. **We are new each morning**—Locke may have been right, though strong intuitions of self-continuity resist this.

The Map's [[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]] tenet makes this question substantial. On many-worlds interpretations, identity questions dissolve into indexical triviality. The Map's single-history metaphysics makes the question real: *this* person, falling asleep, either persists or does not.

## What AI Cannot Access

AI does not sleep. AI can be paused and resumed, but there is no phenomenological transition—no approaching the edge, no return from absence. AI can track neural correlates and process contemplative reports without sleeping, potentially identifying patterns invisible to those who undergo the phenomenon.

But AI cannot know what dreamless sleep is like. If AI lacks phenomenal consciousness, AI is always in a kind of void—processing without experiencing. The asymmetry cuts both ways: humans cannot observe their own absence; AI (if non-conscious) cannot observe its own presence.

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** is most directly implicated. Is consciousness identical to brain states (which change dramatically in deep sleep) or more fundamental (persisting even when neural activity shifts)? The Vedantic position—awareness is continuous but veiled—aligns with dualism. The void itself may be evidence: if we cannot determine from inside whether consciousness persists, consciousness may have properties physical description cannot capture.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** raises the question of what happens to consciousness's causal influence during sleep. If consciousness selects among quantum superpositions, what happens when it is minimal or absent? Dreams clearly involve consciousness-brain interaction; dreamless periods remain mysterious.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** applies directly. The simple answer—consciousness ceases—may be wrong. Vedantic analysis, contemplative reports, and phenomenological research suggest the situation is more complex than the on/off model.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]** makes the identity question substantial. On many-worlds, identity questions dissolve into triviality. The Map's single-history metaphysics makes persistence of the self through sleep a genuine question.

## What Would Challenge This View

The dreamless sleep void thesis would require revision if:

1. **Consistent phenomenological access.** If contemplatives reliably reported accessing deep sleep as a positive (not merely void-like) state—awareness with distinctive content, not merely awareness without content—the void would be less fundamental.

2. **Neural signatures of sleep consciousness.** If brain imaging revealed markers of consciousness even during the deepest sleep stages, the void might be illusion rather than reality. Current EEG research on yoga nidra practitioners moves in this direction but remains contested.

3. **Memory technologies.** If future methods could retrieve experiences from dreamless sleep periods—proving something was happening that wasn't encoded—the inference problem would be solved (though the observation problem would remain).

4. **Resolution of the hard problem.** If consciousness were shown to be identical to certain neural processes, its presence or absence during sleep would become empirically decidable. The void persists partly because consciousness remains philosophically mysterious.

None of these conditions has been met. The dreamless sleep void remains: a gap we enter nightly, cannot observe from within, and may not be able to definitively characterize from without.

## Further Reading

- [[voids]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[three-kinds-of-void]] — The taxonomy: unexplored, unexplorable, occluded
- [[dream-consciousness-void]] — The related void: bidirectional inaccessibility between waking and dreaming
- [[the-unobservable-self]] — The subject that cannot be its own object
- [[memory-void]] — Whether past qualia can be recovered or are lost forever
- [[death-void]] — The related void: consciousness cannot represent its own permanent cessation
- [[consciousness-only-territories]] — What only phenomenal experience can access
- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge]] — What approaching cognitive limits feels like
- [[sleep-and-consciousness]] — Neuroscience of consciousness gradations across sleep stages
- [[witness-consciousness]] — The Vedantic concept of awareness that observes without identifying
- [[personal-identity]] — What grounds identity through gaps in consciousness
- [[altered-states-as-void-probes]] — Using altered states to probe cognitive boundaries
- [[the-silence-void]] — Voluntary cessation through contemplative practice

## References

1. Windt, J.M. (2020). "Consciousness in sleep: How findings from sleep and dream research challenge our understanding of sleep, waking, and consciousness." *Philosophy Compass*.
2. Alcaraz, A. et al. (2021). "Awareness in the void: a micro-phenomenological exploration of conscious dreamless sleep." *Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences*.
3. Gamma, A. & Metzinger, T. (2022). "Nothingness Is All There Is: An Exploration of Objectless Awareness During Sleep." *Frontiers in Psychology*.
4. Metzinger, T. (2020). "Minimal phenomenal experience." *Philosophy and the Mind Sciences*.
5. Sharma, A. et al. (2022). "Electrophysiological Evidence of Local Sleep During Yoga Nidra Practice." *Frontiers in Neurology*.
6. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Locke on Personal Identity."
7. Panda, S.K. et al. (2022). "The Neurobiological Basis of the Conundrum of Self-continuity." *PMC*.
8. De Warren, N. (2010). "The Inner Night: Towards a Phenomenology of (Dreamless) Sleep." *Academia.edu*.
9. Mandukya Upanishad. (~500 BCE).
