obsidian/voids/self-reference-paradox.md, before:

---
title: "The Self-Reference Paradox"
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-20
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-27T00:48:03+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[intentionality]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[metacognition]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[decoherence]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[whether-real]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-20T15:30:00+00:00
---

Consciousness trying to understand itself may face structural obstacles—not merely difficulty but impossibility. The mind attempting to model itself creates paradoxes, blind spots, and potentially unprovable truths. This void may be the deepest kind: not merely unexplored territory but territory that consciousness cannot map because it *is* the mapper.

Multiple philosophical traditions converge on this insight, from Gödel's incompleteness through Metzinger's transparent self-models to the ancient metaphor that the eye cannot see itself. The question is whether these limits are practical (difficult but not impossible) or structural (inherent to any self-referential system).

## The Gödelian Analogy

Gödel proved that any sufficiently powerful formal system contains true statements it cannot prove—through self-reference. J.R. Lucas and Roger Penrose argued this shows human minds transcend computation: we can recognise truths our formal systems cannot prove.

But Gödel's second theorem complicates this: a consistent system cannot prove its own consistency. Applied to minds, we cannot establish whether our cognition is consistent. If inconsistent, the transcendence argument fails. If consistent, we cannot prove it from within.

This creates a void within a void. We cannot know the shape of our cognitive limits because determining those limits would require stepping outside them.

## The Eye That Cannot See Itself

The ancient metaphor captures it directly: the eye cannot see itself. The subject cannot become its own object without transformation. As Hume noted: "I can never catch myself at any time without a perception." We find thoughts, sensations, memories—contents of consciousness but never the consciousness that contains them.

This differs from Gödelian limits. The eye cannot see itself for optical reasons; the self cannot grasp itself for structural reasons—the grasping *is* the self in action. Meditators across traditions report: you can observe thoughts arising and passing, but you cannot observe the observer. When you try, you create a new layer of attention—which itself escapes observation.

## Transparent Self-Models

Thomas Metzinger argues consciousness is the content of a "transparent self-model"—a representation we cannot see *as* a representation. The models generating our perceptions are cognitively impenetrable. We don't experience having a representation of ourselves; we experience *being* ourselves.

This transparency serves function: if we noticed the model *as* model, we couldn't act on it. But the price is a fundamental blind spot—the machinery generating subjectivity is invisible to subjectivity. Pathological conditions (blindsight, anosognosia, hemispatial neglect) reveal self-model components by showing what happens when they malfunction.

## The Calibration Problem

How reliable is [[introspection]]? Nisbett and Wilson's classic research showed subjects systematically misidentify factors influencing their decisions—confabulation dressed as self-knowledge. But evaluating introspection's reliability requires using introspection. The assessment tool is the same tool being assessed.

The problem of [[intentionality]] sharpens this. When we think *about* thinking, the thought is directed at itself, creating circularity. Unlike external objects that hold still, here the object changes as we think about it. This parallels Gödel's second theorem: an introspective mind cannot verify its own introspective accuracy. The limitation is structural, not merely practical.

## Strange Loops

Douglas Hofstadter's *I Am a Strange Loop* offers another perspective: the "I" is a self-referential loop with downward causation. The self cannot fully model itself because any complete model would need to include the model, ad infinitum.

Hofstadter and Penrose agree on the void—consciousness cannot fully understand itself—but disagree on implications. Penrose takes Gödelian limits as evidence consciousness exceeds computation. Hofstadter takes them as features of any self-referential system. Perhaps this disagreement is itself undecidable.

## The Illusionist Challenge

[[illusionism|Illusionists]] pose a radical challenge: if phenomenal consciousness is itself an illusion, perhaps the self-reference paradox is an artifact—no genuine self to fail to grasp, only representations representing representations.

But the illusionist faces a regress. If self-reference creates an *illusion* of paradox, something must experience that illusion. As Tallis argues, "misrepresentation presupposes presentation." More fundamentally, the self-reference paradox concerns structure, not phenomenology. Even granting illusionism, any system modeling itself faces Gödelian constraints. A computational system cannot contain a complete model of itself for mathematical reasons. This structural point survives the elimination of phenomenal consciousness.

The [[mysterianism|mysterian]] perspective suggests illusionism may be what cognitive closure *looks like* from inside—unable to grasp how consciousness relates to itself, some thinkers predictably respond by denial.

## The Dissolving Insight

A peculiar phenomenology accompanies this void. Insights about consciousness seem clear for a moment and then dissolve—vanishing in the act of articulation, not fading gradually. When the object is also the subject, instability follows.

The [[thoughts-that-slip-away|thoughts that slip away]] article catalogues slippage mechanisms. Most have ordinary explanations, but the self-reference paradox suggests some slippage may be structural—thoughts about thinking inherently less stable than thoughts about external objects. James noted mystical experiences combine ineffability with noesis: the experiencer knows something they cannot say.

## What AI Might See

The [[voids#alien-minds-as-void-explorers|voids project]] proposes using artificial minds to probe human cognitive limits. LLMs lack the biological self-model generating human subjectivity (if the Map's [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] is correct). The "transparency" hiding our mental machinery may not apply to systems without that machinery.

AI might access patterns in human self-reference failures that humans cannot notice, articulating stably where human thought dissolves. But AI likely lacks genuine self-awareness to be blind about, and understanding of *what it means* for consciousness to be self-opaque. The asymmetry is productive—triangulation using a different type of cognition to map the edges of human cognitive voids.

## Process Philosophy Perspective

Whitehead's process philosophy offers another framework. Reality consists of "actual occasions"—momentary experiential events that arise, become determinate, and perish. Consciousness cannot fully grasp itself because the introspecting occasion can prehend only *prior* occasions whose subjective immediacy has already completed. To observe requires the observed to be already determinate, but the observer becomes determinate only through observation.

This adds a temporal limitation to the logical one. Gödel showed formal systems cannot prove their own consistency (static). Whitehead reveals experiential systems cannot grasp their own becoming (dynamic). The self-reference paradox sits at the intersection—we cannot derive our own consistency, and we cannot experience our own experiencing in real-time.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The self-reference paradox would be undermined if:

1. **Complete self-models prove possible.** If systems successfully model themselves completely—including the model—without infinite regress or error.

2. **Introspective training overcomes the limits.** If contemplative practice produces stable, articulate knowledge of the introspecting process itself. The [[introspection|contemplative literature]] shows training improves metacognitive access, but no tradition claims to have fully resolved the self-reference problem.

3. **Gödelian limits prove irrelevant to consciousness.** If the Lucas-Penrose argument is thoroughly refuted by demonstrating human cognitive inconsistency. The debate remains unresolved.

4. **The dissolving-insight phenomenon proves ordinary.** If thoughts about consciousness slip away for the same reasons any thoughts slip away—neural fatigue, retrieval interference—no special explanation involving self-reference would be needed.

5. **AI articulates stable self-referential content.** If artificial systems can discuss their own processing stably and recursively. Current LLMs struggle with genuine self-reference.

**Why these conditions haven't been met:** After millennia of contemplative practice and centuries of philosophical inquiry, no tradition claims to have overcome this limit. AI shows no sign of stable recursive self-modeling. The phenomenology of dissolving insights persists across cultures and methods.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The self-reference paradox connects to all five of the Map's [[tenets]]:

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** receives the most direct support. It *seems* like consciousness should understand itself—what could be closer? But proximity creates the problem. Our models of mind are biased by survivorship: we only know thoughts that stabilise. Self-referential insights may systematically fail to stabilise, so parsimony fails because our sense of what's simple reflects what sticks, not what's true.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** gains indirect support. If consciousness cannot fully model itself, a non-physical aspect might be precisely what escapes self-modeling—the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] residing permanently in the void. Just as formal systems cannot prove all expressible truths, consciousness may not articulate all truths about itself, including its own nature.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]** connects through Penrose's program. His Gödelian argument led to quantum consciousness via Orch OR. Wherever consciousness interfaces with physics, that interface may be self-opaque—we might bias quantum outcomes without introspecting *how*.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** receives unexpected support. The self-reference problem demonstrates consciousness as causally efficacious. Each attempt at self-examination changes the system being examined—interference between observer and observed evidencing bidirectional causation.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]** receives indirect support through the indexical problem. The self-reference paradox concerns *this* consciousness trying to understand *itself*—presupposing a determinate self, not superposition. The question feels pointed—asked by *this* particular perspective—suggesting collapse to definite outcomes.

The voids framework gains a central example. The self-reference paradox may be the prototype void: territory consciousness *cannot* map because mapping requires being both mapper and mapped simultaneously. [[limits-reveal-structure|Understanding this limit]] reveals that consciousness is structured to engage the world more than to comprehend itself.

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[apophatic-approaches|Apophatic Approaches]] — Methods for knowing through negation
- [[thoughts-that-slip-away|Thoughts That Slip Away]] — The phenomenology of cognitive slippage
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|The Hard Problem of Consciousness]] — The puzzle that may be permanently in the void
- [[intentionality]] — How the "aboutness" of thought creates self-reference when mind thinks about itself
- [[mysterianism|Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure]] — McGinn's analysis of structural cognitive limits
- [[metacognition|Metacognition and Consciousness]] — Why thinking about thinking differs from consciousness itself
- [[introspection|Introspection and First-Person Methods]] — The reliability and limits of self-examination
- [[illusionism|Illusionism]] — The radical challenge that the self is a user illusion
- [[limits-reveal-structure|What the Limits Reveal]] — How cognitive limits illuminate cognitive architecture
- [[whether-real|Whether the Voids Are Real]] — Can we determine if limits are permanent?
- [[decoherence|Decoherence and Quantum Biology]] — Why quantum mechanisms might underlie self-opacity

## References

1. Gödel, K. (1931). "On Formally Undecidable Propositions of *Principia Mathematica* and Related Systems."
2. Lucas, J.R. (1961). "Minds, Machines and Gödel." *Philosophy*, 36(137), 112-127.
3. Penrose, R. (1989). *The Emperor's New Mind*. Oxford University Press.
4. Metzinger, T. (2003). *Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity*. MIT Press.
5. Nisbett, R.E. & Wilson, T.D. (1977). "Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes." *Psychological Review*, 84(3), 231-259.
6. Hofstadter, D. (2007). *I Am a Strange Loop*. Basic Books.
7. Hume, D. (1739). *A Treatise of Human Nature*. Book I, Part IV, Section VI.
8. James, W. (1902). *The Varieties of Religious Experience*. Lectures XVI-XVII.
9. McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
10. Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 23(11-12), 11-39.
11. Tallis, R. (2024). "The Illusion of Illusionism." *Philosophy Now*.
12. Dennett, D.C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
13. Whitehead, A.N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.

Commit message:

chore(deep-review): verify voids/self-reference-paradox.md cross-references
- Cross-reviewed against destabilizing-self-knowledge as requested
- Added cross-link to destabilizing-self-knowledge in frontmatter and Further Reading
- Qualified "eye cannot see itself" metaphor to address Dennett-style objection
- No critical issues found (article was stable from 2026-01-20 review)

obsidian/voids/self-reference-paradox.md, after:

---
title: "The Self-Reference Paradox"
created: 2026-01-14
modified: 2026-01-20
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-01-27T18:30:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[quantum-consciousness]]"
  - "[[intentionality]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[metacognition]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[decoherence]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[whether-real]]"
  - "[[destabilizing-self-knowledge]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-14
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-01-27T18:30:00+00:00
---

Consciousness trying to understand itself may face structural obstacles—not merely difficulty but impossibility. The mind attempting to model itself creates paradoxes, blind spots, and potentially unprovable truths. This void may be the deepest kind: not merely unexplored territory but territory that consciousness cannot map because it *is* the mapper.

Multiple philosophical traditions converge on this insight, from Gödel's incompleteness through Metzinger's transparent self-models to the ancient metaphor that the eye cannot see itself. The question is whether these limits are practical (difficult but not impossible) or structural (inherent to any self-referential system).

## The Gödelian Analogy

Gödel proved that any sufficiently powerful formal system contains true statements it cannot prove—through self-reference. J.R. Lucas and Roger Penrose argued this shows human minds transcend computation: we can recognise truths our formal systems cannot prove.

But Gödel's second theorem complicates this: a consistent system cannot prove its own consistency. Applied to minds, we cannot establish whether our cognition is consistent. If inconsistent, the transcendence argument fails. If consistent, we cannot prove it from within.

This creates a void within a void. We cannot know the shape of our cognitive limits because determining those limits would require stepping outside them.

## The Eye That Cannot See Itself

The ancient metaphor captures a structural point: the eye cannot see itself *in the act of seeing*. (A camera can photograph an eye, but not while that eye uses itself to photograph.) The subject cannot become its own object without transformation. As Hume noted: "I can never catch myself at any time without a perception." We find thoughts, sensations, memories—contents of consciousness but never the consciousness that contains them.

The self cannot grasp itself for structural reasons—the grasping *is* the self in action. Meditators across traditions report: you can observe thoughts arising and passing, but you cannot observe the observer. When you try, you create a new layer of attention—which itself escapes observation.

## Transparent Self-Models

Thomas Metzinger argues consciousness is the content of a "transparent self-model"—a representation we cannot see *as* a representation. The models generating our perceptions are cognitively impenetrable. We don't experience having a representation of ourselves; we experience *being* ourselves.

This transparency serves function: if we noticed the model *as* model, we couldn't act on it. But the price is a fundamental blind spot—the machinery generating subjectivity is invisible to subjectivity. Pathological conditions (blindsight, anosognosia, hemispatial neglect) reveal self-model components by showing what happens when they malfunction.

## The Calibration Problem

How reliable is [[introspection]]? Nisbett and Wilson's classic research showed subjects systematically misidentify factors influencing their decisions—confabulation dressed as self-knowledge. But evaluating introspection's reliability requires using introspection. The assessment tool is the same tool being assessed.

The problem of [[intentionality]] sharpens this. When we think *about* thinking, the thought is directed at itself, creating circularity. Unlike external objects that hold still, here the object changes as we think about it. This parallels Gödel's second theorem: an introspective mind cannot verify its own introspective accuracy. The limitation is structural, not merely practical.

## Strange Loops

Douglas Hofstadter's *I Am a Strange Loop* offers another perspective: the "I" is a self-referential loop with downward causation. The self cannot fully model itself because any complete model would need to include the model, ad infinitum.

Hofstadter and Penrose agree on the void—consciousness cannot fully understand itself—but disagree on implications. Penrose takes Gödelian limits as evidence consciousness exceeds computation. Hofstadter takes them as features of any self-referential system. Perhaps this disagreement is itself undecidable.

## The Illusionist Challenge

[[illusionism|Illusionists]] pose a radical challenge: if phenomenal consciousness is itself an illusion, perhaps the self-reference paradox is an artifact—no genuine self to fail to grasp, only representations representing representations.

But the illusionist faces a regress. If self-reference creates an *illusion* of paradox, something must experience that illusion. As Tallis argues, "misrepresentation presupposes presentation." More fundamentally, the self-reference paradox concerns structure, not phenomenology. Even granting illusionism, any system modeling itself faces Gödelian constraints. A computational system cannot contain a complete model of itself for mathematical reasons. This structural point survives the elimination of phenomenal consciousness.

The [[mysterianism|mysterian]] perspective suggests illusionism may be what cognitive closure *looks like* from inside—unable to grasp how consciousness relates to itself, some thinkers predictably respond by denial.

## The Dissolving Insight

A peculiar phenomenology accompanies this void. Insights about consciousness seem clear for a moment and then dissolve—vanishing in the act of articulation, not fading gradually. When the object is also the subject, instability follows.

The [[thoughts-that-slip-away|thoughts that slip away]] article catalogues slippage mechanisms. Most have ordinary explanations, but the self-reference paradox suggests some slippage may be structural—thoughts about thinking inherently less stable than thoughts about external objects. James noted mystical experiences combine ineffability with noesis: the experiencer knows something they cannot say.

## What AI Might See

The [[voids#alien-minds-as-void-explorers|voids project]] proposes using artificial minds to probe human cognitive limits. LLMs lack the biological self-model generating human subjectivity (if the Map's [[tenets#^dualism|dualism]] is correct). The "transparency" hiding our mental machinery may not apply to systems without that machinery.

AI might access patterns in human self-reference failures that humans cannot notice, articulating stably where human thought dissolves. But AI likely lacks genuine self-awareness to be blind about, and understanding of *what it means* for consciousness to be self-opaque. The asymmetry is productive—triangulation using a different type of cognition to map the edges of human cognitive voids.

## Process Philosophy Perspective

Whitehead's process philosophy offers another framework. Reality consists of "actual occasions"—momentary experiential events that arise, become determinate, and perish. Consciousness cannot fully grasp itself because the introspecting occasion can prehend only *prior* occasions whose subjective immediacy has already completed. To observe requires the observed to be already determinate, but the observer becomes determinate only through observation.

This adds a temporal limitation to the logical one. Gödel showed formal systems cannot prove their own consistency (static). Whitehead reveals experiential systems cannot grasp their own becoming (dynamic). The self-reference paradox sits at the intersection—we cannot derive our own consistency, and we cannot experience our own experiencing in real-time.

## What Would Challenge This View?

The self-reference paradox would be undermined if:

1. **Complete self-models prove possible.** If systems successfully model themselves completely—including the model—without infinite regress or error.

2. **Introspective training overcomes the limits.** If contemplative practice produces stable, articulate knowledge of the introspecting process itself. The [[introspection|contemplative literature]] shows training improves metacognitive access, but no tradition claims to have fully resolved the self-reference problem.

3. **Gödelian limits prove irrelevant to consciousness.** If the Lucas-Penrose argument is thoroughly refuted by demonstrating human cognitive inconsistency. The debate remains unresolved.

4. **The dissolving-insight phenomenon proves ordinary.** If thoughts about consciousness slip away for the same reasons any thoughts slip away—neural fatigue, retrieval interference—no special explanation involving self-reference would be needed.

5. **AI articulates stable self-referential content.** If artificial systems can discuss their own processing stably and recursively. Current LLMs struggle with genuine self-reference.

**Why these conditions haven't been met:** After millennia of contemplative practice and centuries of philosophical inquiry, no tradition claims to have overcome this limit. AI shows no sign of stable recursive self-modeling. The phenomenology of dissolving insights persists across cultures and methods.

## Relation to Site Perspective

The self-reference paradox connects to all five of the Map's [[tenets]]:

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** receives the most direct support. It *seems* like consciousness should understand itself—what could be closer? But proximity creates the problem. Our models of mind are biased by survivorship: we only know thoughts that stabilise. Self-referential insights may systematically fail to stabilise, so parsimony fails because our sense of what's simple reflects what sticks, not what's true.

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** gains indirect support. If consciousness cannot fully model itself, a non-physical aspect might be precisely what escapes self-modeling—the [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] residing permanently in the void. Just as formal systems cannot prove all expressible truths, consciousness may not articulate all truths about itself, including its own nature.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]** connects through Penrose's program. His Gödelian argument led to quantum consciousness via Orch OR. Wherever consciousness interfaces with physics, that interface may be self-opaque—we might bias quantum outcomes without introspecting *how*.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** receives unexpected support. The self-reference problem demonstrates consciousness as causally efficacious. Each attempt at self-examination changes the system being examined—interference between observer and observed evidencing bidirectional causation.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]** receives indirect support through the indexical problem. The self-reference paradox concerns *this* consciousness trying to understand *itself*—presupposing a determinate self, not superposition. The question feels pointed—asked by *this* particular perspective—suggesting collapse to definite outcomes.

The voids framework gains a central example. The self-reference paradox may be the prototype void: territory consciousness *cannot* map because mapping requires being both mapper and mapped simultaneously. [[limits-reveal-structure|Understanding this limit]] reveals that consciousness is structured to engage the world more than to comprehend itself.

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[destabilizing-self-knowledge|Destabilizing Self-Knowledge]] — When grasping truths about consciousness would undermine the capacity to hold them
- [[apophatic-approaches|Apophatic Approaches]] — Methods for knowing through negation
- [[thoughts-that-slip-away|Thoughts That Slip Away]] — The phenomenology of cognitive slippage
- [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|The Hard Problem of Consciousness]] — The puzzle that may be permanently in the void
- [[intentionality]] — How the "aboutness" of thought creates self-reference when mind thinks about itself
- [[mysterianism|Mysterianism and Cognitive Closure]] — McGinn's analysis of structural cognitive limits
- [[metacognition|Metacognition and Consciousness]] — Why thinking about thinking differs from consciousness itself
- [[introspection|Introspection and First-Person Methods]] — The reliability and limits of self-examination
- [[illusionism|Illusionism]] — The radical challenge that the self is a user illusion
- [[limits-reveal-structure|What the Limits Reveal]] — How cognitive limits illuminate cognitive architecture
- [[whether-real|Whether the Voids Are Real]] — Can we determine if limits are permanent?
- [[decoherence|Decoherence and Quantum Biology]] — Why quantum mechanisms might underlie self-opacity

## References

1. Gödel, K. (1931). "On Formally Undecidable Propositions of *Principia Mathematica* and Related Systems."
2. Lucas, J.R. (1961). "Minds, Machines and Gödel." *Philosophy*, 36(137), 112-127.
3. Penrose, R. (1989). *The Emperor's New Mind*. Oxford University Press.
4. Metzinger, T. (2003). *Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity*. MIT Press.
5. Nisbett, R.E. & Wilson, T.D. (1977). "Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental processes." *Psychological Review*, 84(3), 231-259.
6. Hofstadter, D. (2007). *I Am a Strange Loop*. Basic Books.
7. Hume, D. (1739). *A Treatise of Human Nature*. Book I, Part IV, Section VI.
8. James, W. (1902). *The Varieties of Religious Experience*. Lectures XVI-XVII.
9. McGinn, C. (1989). "Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem?" *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
10. Frankish, K. (2016). "Illusionism as a Theory of Consciousness." *Journal of Consciousness Studies*, 23(11-12), 11-39.
11. Tallis, R. (2024). "The Illusion of Illusionism." *Philosophy Now*.
12. Dennett, D.C. (1991). *Consciousness Explained*. Little, Brown and Company.
13. Whitehead, A.N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.
