obsidian/voids/temporal-asymmetry-remembering-anticipating.md, before:

---
title: "The Asymmetry Between Remembering and Anticipating"
created: 2026-01-21
modified: 2026-01-22
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-04T11:13:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[temporal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[autonoetic-consciousness]]"
  - "[[episodic-memory]]"
  - "[[prospective-memory]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[philosophy-of-time]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
description: "Memory re-inhabits past experience through traces; anticipation constructs futures without causal contact. This asymmetry reveals minds as trace-dependent."
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[temporal-consciousness-void]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-21
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-02-04T11:13:00+00:00
---

We can re-experience the past but only imagine the future. When you remember yesterday's conversation, you don't merely retrieve information—you inhabit the scene, feel its texture, re-live what happened. But when you think about tomorrow's meeting, however vividly, you construct a simulation that lacks something memories possess. This asymmetry is so familiar we barely notice it, yet it may mark a fundamental void in cognition. We can only directly know what has causally affected us. The future, by definition, has not.

This asymmetry matters for The Unfinishable Map because it reveals something essential about the structure of consciousness: minds embedded in causal webs can access reality only through traces. The past leaves traces; the future does not. If consciousness operates through causal contact with what is—as the Map's framework proposes—then the impossibility of pre-experiencing may not be a limitation to be overcome but a necessary feature of what minds are.

## The Phenomenological Difference

Memory and future simulation share neural substrate—hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex all activate for both. Patient KC, who lost [[episodic-memory|episodic memory]], also lost the ability to imagine his personal future. Yet despite shared architecture, the phenomenological products differ.

[[autonoetic-consciousness|Autonoetic consciousness]]—Tulving's term for the awareness accompanying episodic memory—includes a distinctive phenomenal marker: the felt sense of pastness. When you remember your wedding day, it arrives tagged as having-happened. This isn't inferred but immediately present—a quale, directly given. De Brigard (2020) analyzes this as an "epistemic feeling"—a metacognitive state that tracks source and reliability. Functionalists will note this framing is compatible with their view: the feeling of pastness could be a cognitive marker rather than an irreducible quale. The Map's dualist perspective maintains that even if the feeling *functions* as a marker, its phenomenal character—what it is like to experience pastness—remains irreducible to the marking function.

Future simulation differs categorically. The imagined future feels *constructed* rather than *contacted*. Even vivid future simulation—detailed imagery, emotional engagement—lacks the quality of having-been-there. Neuroimaging confirms this: future simulation produces greater hippocampal activation than memory retrieval. The extra constructive work is phenomenologically manifest.

| Feature | Memory | Future Simulation |
|---------|--------|-------------------|
| Phenomenal marker | Pastness (having-been) | Futuricity (might-be) |
| Felt quality | Contacted, received | Constructed, projected |
| Modal character | Actually occurred | May or may not occur |

## Why Pre-Experience is Impossible

The asymmetry connects to deep features of causation and information.

**Informational:** Future events haven't happened, so there's no information to access. We can extrapolate from patterns, but we cannot access facts about the future because there are no such facts yet. Re-experiencing works by accessing traces—the past event caused present brain states that can be reactivated. The future has caused nothing yet.

**Causal:** Memories exist because past events causally influenced the brain. Causal influence runs from past to future, not future to past. Future events cannot have caused present brain states (absent retrocausality). As Huw Price notes, physical laws are time-symmetric, yet causation appears asymmetric. Memory exemplifies this: it's correlation between present states and past events, existing because past events caused present traces. No symmetric mechanism connects us to future events.

**Phenomenological:** The pastness quale—the feeling of "having been there"—seems to require having actually been there. A simulated future event lacks this phenomenal signature precisely because there was no original experience to re-inhabit. The phenomenology tracks the metaphysical distinction: we can only directly know what has actually happened to us.

## The Void

This asymmetry marks an [[voids#The Unexplorable|unexplorable void]]—darkness that cannot be illuminated given how consciousness works.

What would pre-experience even be? To pre-experience tomorrow's meeting would apply the pastness quale to something that hasn't happened—but the pastness quale marks causal contact with the past. Applying it to the future is like applying red to a sound: a category error. Colin McGinn's [[mysterianism|mysterianism]] distinguishes problems that are difficult from those that are cognitively closed. Pre-experience may be neither: not difficult, not cognitively closed, but *conceptually empty*. There's nothing there to achieve.

Evidence converges: Neural studies show future simulation shares memory's substrate but requires more effort and produces less vivid outputs. Patient KC lost both episodic memory and future imagination together—shared machinery, but phenomenologically distinct products. The epistemic asymmetry between past and future is well-established: we know the past through traces; we can only predict the future.

This void reveals that **consciousness operates through traces**—we are aware of what has causally affected us. As Husserl's analysis shows, retention (the just-past held in awareness) is phenomenologically distinct from protention (openness to what's coming). The asymmetry is built into temporal experience itself. Imagination uses memory's machinery but cannot reproduce its phenomenal quality: construction feels different from reconstruction because only reconstruction has an anchor in reality.

## The Illusionist Challenge

[[illusionism|Illusionists]] and [[functionalism|functionalists]] might argue that the "pastness quale" is a functional marker rather than a genuine phenomenal property. Three responses preserve the void framework:

First, to experience the illusion of pastness, something must experience it. The illusionist relocates the quale from "pastness itself" to "seeming pastness," but seeming is still experiencing.

Second, even granting pastness as a functional marker, why can we construct it only for past events? The answer returns to causation: the marker tracks causal contact. Future events haven't caused anything yet.

Third, the core claim isn't that there's an irreducible pastness quale (though the Map endorses this). The core claim is that minds embedded in causal webs cannot pre-experience futures. This holds regardless of how we cash out "experience"—the asymmetry derives from time's causal structure.

## Contemplative Perspectives

Buddhist traditions confirm this analysis. The teaching of impermanence (*anicca*) holds that only the present truly exists—past has ceased, future hasn't arisen. Memory reconstructs what no longer is; anticipation imagines what doesn't yet exist. Even in deep concentration states (*jhānas*), where both retrospection and prospection diminish, the asymmetry returns when normal processing resumes. The altered states don't grant pre-experience—they reduce both temporal directions equally. The Buddhist analysis of dependent origination (*pratītyasamutpāda*) parallels the causal argument: consciousness arises from past conditions; future events cannot serve as conditions because they haven't arisen.

## Approaches to the Edge

The [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic tradition]] offers methods for engaging with conceptual limits. We can describe what pre-experience would have to be—the pastness quale applied to non-events, causal contact with what hasn't caused anything—and notice why it fails to cohere. The void takes shape through its contradictions.

Limiting cases illuminate the boundary. **Déjà vu** applies the phenomenology of memory inappropriately—feeling pastness without genuine past contact. The experience is disorienting precisely because the pastness quale appears without its proper cause, illuminating what proper memory involves. **Highly predictable events** show that confidence doesn't transform prediction into pre-experience: you know you'll have coffee tomorrow, but vivid anticipation still lacks the pastness quale. **Reported precognitive experiences**, even if granted, would represent foreknowledge rather than re-living—a different quale structure entirely.

AI systems offer a methodological probe. Large language models lack temporal phenomenology—they don't re-experience past prompts. If AI shows functional asymmetry between past-access and future-simulation despite lacking phenomenology, this suggests the asymmetry is structural. If AI shows symmetry, this suggests the asymmetry depends on something consciousness adds.

## Process Philosophy Perspective

Whitehead's process philosophy illuminates the asymmetry. Each "actual occasion" prehends (grasps) what has already become actual. This prehension is inherently backward-looking: you can only grasp what exists. Memory is specialised prehension—present occasions grasping past ones. Future occasions, not yet actual, cannot be prehended because there's nothing there yet. The future exists only as potentiality; the past has become actual. This explains why imagination feels constructive: we're combining possibilities using patterns from what has become actual, not contacting future actuality.

## Relation to Site Perspective

This void connects to all five [[tenets]]:

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]:** The pastness quale is a genuine phenomenal property—part of what it is like to remember. A system that merely stored timestamped information would lack this qualitative character. If qualia are irreducible, temporal qualia are irreducible too.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]:** Consciousness selecting among quantum possibilities operates from present toward future, not future toward present. The void reflects the direction in which selection can work.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]:** Consciousness can act toward futures but can only know pasts. We remember what has caused us; we act toward what we will cause. This connects to [[free-will]]: we deliberate about futures precisely because our causal influence runs futureward, while we have only epistemic access to the past. The impossibility of pre-experience is the impossibility of epistemic access running futureward.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]:** Memory presupposes a single actual past—when you remember your wedding, you remember it as having actually occurred, not as one branch among many. An MWI defender might reply that branch-relative memory works fine: in your branch, your wedding did actually occur. The Map responds that the *feeling of actuality* built into the pastness quale points to genuine metaphysical uniqueness, not mere indexical location within a branching structure. The Map's single-history metaphysics makes the asymmetry comprehensible: we can't pre-experience the future because it doesn't exist yet.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]:** A simpler universe might have time-symmetric cognition. That our minds are asymmetric suggests reality has structure that simple physical description misses.

## What Would Challenge This View?

Several findings would require revision: genuine pre-experience (the pastness quale applied to events that hadn't occurred, phenomenologically identical to memory); symmetric AI temporal processing (suggesting the asymmetry is purely structural); retrocausality affecting memory (future events causing present brain states, providing a mechanism for future-traces); contemplative dissolution of the pastness/futuricity distinction (though traditions generally confirm rather than dissolve it); or functional memory without the pastness quale (suggesting the quale is separable from causal contact—the Map predicts this is impossible for conscious systems).

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[temporal-consciousness-void]] — Why consciousness is confined to a moving present
- [[autonoetic-consciousness]] — The self-knowing awareness that enables mental time travel
- [[episodic-memory]] — The memory system that preserves experienced events
- [[prospective-memory]] — Future-directed memory and its phenomenology
- [[temporal-consciousness]] — How time structures conscious experience
- [[philosophy-of-time]] — McTaggart's A/B series, presentism, and the growing block
- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge]] — What happens when consciousness approaches limits
- [[thoughts-that-slip-away]] — Related phenomenology of cognitive limitation
- [[mysterianism]] — Cognitive closure and the limits of understanding
- [[illusionism]] — The challenge that temporal qualia are mere functional markers
- [[apophatic-approaches]] — Methods for engaging with what exceeds articulation
- [[limits-reveal-structure]] — How boundaries illuminate architecture
- [[introspection]] — First-person access to temporal experience
- [[qualia]] — Irreducible qualities of experience, including pastness
- [[tenets|Site Tenets]] — The foundational commitments shaping this investigation

## References

- De Brigard, F. (2020). The phenomenology of remembering is an epistemic feeling. *Frontiers in Psychology*, 11, 1531.
- Hoerl, C. (2018). Remembering past experiences. In K. Michaelian et al. (eds.), *New Directions in the Philosophy of Memory*. Routledge.
- Husserl, E. (1991). *On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time* (trans. Brough). Kluwer.
- McGinn, C. (1989). Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem? *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- Price, H. & Weslake, B. (2009). The time-asymmetry of causation. In H. Beebee et al. (eds.), *The Oxford Handbook of Causation*. Oxford University Press.
- Schacter, D.L. & Addis, D.R. (2007). The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B*, 362(1481), 773-786.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Temporal Consciousness. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness-temporal/
- Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. *Canadian Psychology*, 26(1), 1-12.
- Whitehead, A.N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): enhance cross-link in voids/temporal-asymmetry-remembering-anticipating.md
- Third deep-review confirms stability: no critical issues found
- Improved temporal-consciousness-void link description to clarify complementary relationship
- Assessed void integration: articles address distinct aspects (present-confinement vs past/future asymmetry)
- Created review archive documenting analysis

obsidian/voids/temporal-asymmetry-remembering-anticipating.md, after:

---
title: "The Asymmetry Between Remembering and Anticipating"
created: 2026-01-21
modified: 2026-01-22
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-04T18:47:00+00:00
draft: false
topics:
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
concepts:
  - "[[temporal-consciousness]]"
  - "[[autonoetic-consciousness]]"
  - "[[episodic-memory]]"
  - "[[prospective-memory]]"
  - "[[phenomenology]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
  - "[[qualia]]"
  - "[[philosophy-of-time]]"
  - "[[illusionism]]"
  - "[[introspection]]"
description: "Memory re-inhabits past experience through traces; anticipation constructs futures without causal contact. This asymmetry reveals minds as trace-dependent."
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[temporal-consciousness-void]]"
  - "[[phenomenology-of-the-edge]]"
  - "[[limits-reveal-structure]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[apophatic-approaches]]"
  - "[[free-will]]"
  - "[[functionalism]]"
ai_contribution: 100
author: null
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-21
last_curated: null
last_deep_review: 2026-02-04T18:47:00+00:00
---

We can re-experience the past but only imagine the future. When you remember yesterday's conversation, you don't merely retrieve information—you inhabit the scene, feel its texture, re-live what happened. But when you think about tomorrow's meeting, however vividly, you construct a simulation that lacks something memories possess. This asymmetry is so familiar we barely notice it, yet it may mark a fundamental void in cognition. We can only directly know what has causally affected us. The future, by definition, has not.

This asymmetry matters for The Unfinishable Map because it reveals something essential about the structure of consciousness: minds embedded in causal webs can access reality only through traces. The past leaves traces; the future does not. If consciousness operates through causal contact with what is—as the Map's framework proposes—then the impossibility of pre-experiencing may not be a limitation to be overcome but a necessary feature of what minds are.

## The Phenomenological Difference

Memory and future simulation share neural substrate—hippocampus, medial prefrontal cortex, posterior cingulate cortex all activate for both. Patient KC, who lost [[episodic-memory|episodic memory]], also lost the ability to imagine his personal future. Yet despite shared architecture, the phenomenological products differ.

[[autonoetic-consciousness|Autonoetic consciousness]]—Tulving's term for the awareness accompanying episodic memory—includes a distinctive phenomenal marker: the felt sense of pastness. When you remember your wedding day, it arrives tagged as having-happened. This isn't inferred but immediately present—a quale, directly given. De Brigard (2020) analyzes this as an "epistemic feeling"—a metacognitive state that tracks source and reliability. Functionalists will note this framing is compatible with their view: the feeling of pastness could be a cognitive marker rather than an irreducible quale. The Map's dualist perspective maintains that even if the feeling *functions* as a marker, its phenomenal character—what it is like to experience pastness—remains irreducible to the marking function.

Future simulation differs categorically. The imagined future feels *constructed* rather than *contacted*. Even vivid future simulation—detailed imagery, emotional engagement—lacks the quality of having-been-there. Neuroimaging confirms this: future simulation produces greater hippocampal activation than memory retrieval. The extra constructive work is phenomenologically manifest.

| Feature | Memory | Future Simulation |
|---------|--------|-------------------|
| Phenomenal marker | Pastness (having-been) | Futuricity (might-be) |
| Felt quality | Contacted, received | Constructed, projected |
| Modal character | Actually occurred | May or may not occur |

## Why Pre-Experience is Impossible

The asymmetry connects to deep features of causation and information.

**Informational:** Future events haven't happened, so there's no information to access. We can extrapolate from patterns, but we cannot access facts about the future because there are no such facts yet. Re-experiencing works by accessing traces—the past event caused present brain states that can be reactivated. The future has caused nothing yet.

**Causal:** Memories exist because past events causally influenced the brain. Causal influence runs from past to future, not future to past. Future events cannot have caused present brain states (absent retrocausality). As Huw Price notes, physical laws are time-symmetric, yet causation appears asymmetric. Memory exemplifies this: it's correlation between present states and past events, existing because past events caused present traces. No symmetric mechanism connects us to future events.

**Phenomenological:** The pastness quale—the feeling of "having been there"—seems to require having actually been there. A simulated future event lacks this phenomenal signature precisely because there was no original experience to re-inhabit. The phenomenology tracks the metaphysical distinction: we can only directly know what has actually happened to us.

## The Void

This asymmetry marks an [[voids#The Unexplorable|unexplorable void]]—darkness that cannot be illuminated given how consciousness works.

What would pre-experience even be? To pre-experience tomorrow's meeting would apply the pastness quale to something that hasn't happened—but the pastness quale marks causal contact with the past. Applying it to the future is like applying red to a sound: a category error. Colin McGinn's [[mysterianism|mysterianism]] distinguishes problems that are difficult from those that are cognitively closed. Pre-experience may be neither: not difficult, not cognitively closed, but *conceptually empty*. There's nothing there to achieve.

Evidence converges: Neural studies show future simulation shares memory's substrate but requires more effort and produces less vivid outputs. Patient KC lost both episodic memory and future imagination together—shared machinery, but phenomenologically distinct products. The epistemic asymmetry between past and future is well-established: we know the past through traces; we can only predict the future.

This void reveals that **consciousness operates through traces**—we are aware of what has causally affected us. As Husserl's analysis shows, retention (the just-past held in awareness) is phenomenologically distinct from protention (openness to what's coming). The asymmetry is built into temporal experience itself. Imagination uses memory's machinery but cannot reproduce its phenomenal quality: construction feels different from reconstruction because only reconstruction has an anchor in reality.

## The Illusionist Challenge

[[illusionism|Illusionists]] and [[functionalism|functionalists]] might argue that the "pastness quale" is a functional marker rather than a genuine phenomenal property. Three responses preserve the void framework:

First, to experience the illusion of pastness, something must experience it. The illusionist relocates the quale from "pastness itself" to "seeming pastness," but seeming is still experiencing.

Second, even granting pastness as a functional marker, why can we construct it only for past events? The answer returns to causation: the marker tracks causal contact. Future events haven't caused anything yet.

Third, the core claim isn't that there's an irreducible pastness quale (though the Map endorses this). The core claim is that minds embedded in causal webs cannot pre-experience futures. This holds regardless of how we cash out "experience"—the asymmetry derives from time's causal structure.

## Contemplative Perspectives

Buddhist traditions confirm this analysis. The teaching of impermanence (*anicca*) holds that only the present truly exists—past has ceased, future hasn't arisen. Memory reconstructs what no longer is; anticipation imagines what doesn't yet exist. Even in deep concentration states (*jhānas*), where both retrospection and prospection diminish, the asymmetry returns when normal processing resumes. The altered states don't grant pre-experience—they reduce both temporal directions equally. The Buddhist analysis of dependent origination (*pratītyasamutpāda*) parallels the causal argument: consciousness arises from past conditions; future events cannot serve as conditions because they haven't arisen.

## Approaches to the Edge

The [[apophatic-approaches|apophatic tradition]] offers methods for engaging with conceptual limits. We can describe what pre-experience would have to be—the pastness quale applied to non-events, causal contact with what hasn't caused anything—and notice why it fails to cohere. The void takes shape through its contradictions.

Limiting cases illuminate the boundary. **Déjà vu** applies the phenomenology of memory inappropriately—feeling pastness without genuine past contact. The experience is disorienting precisely because the pastness quale appears without its proper cause, illuminating what proper memory involves. **Highly predictable events** show that confidence doesn't transform prediction into pre-experience: you know you'll have coffee tomorrow, but vivid anticipation still lacks the pastness quale. **Reported precognitive experiences**, even if granted, would represent foreknowledge rather than re-living—a different quale structure entirely.

AI systems offer a methodological probe. Large language models lack temporal phenomenology—they don't re-experience past prompts. If AI shows functional asymmetry between past-access and future-simulation despite lacking phenomenology, this suggests the asymmetry is structural. If AI shows symmetry, this suggests the asymmetry depends on something consciousness adds.

## Process Philosophy Perspective

Whitehead's process philosophy illuminates the asymmetry. Each "actual occasion" prehends (grasps) what has already become actual. This prehension is inherently backward-looking: you can only grasp what exists. Memory is specialised prehension—present occasions grasping past ones. Future occasions, not yet actual, cannot be prehended because there's nothing there yet. The future exists only as potentiality; the past has become actual. This explains why imagination feels constructive: we're combining possibilities using patterns from what has become actual, not contacting future actuality.

## Relation to Site Perspective

This void connects to all five [[tenets]]:

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]:** The pastness quale is a genuine phenomenal property—part of what it is like to remember. A system that merely stored timestamped information would lack this qualitative character. If qualia are irreducible, temporal qualia are irreducible too.

**[[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]]:** Consciousness selecting among quantum possibilities operates from present toward future, not future toward present. The void reflects the direction in which selection can work.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]:** Consciousness can act toward futures but can only know pasts. We remember what has caused us; we act toward what we will cause. This connects to [[free-will]]: we deliberate about futures precisely because our causal influence runs futureward, while we have only epistemic access to the past. The impossibility of pre-experience is the impossibility of epistemic access running futureward.

**[[tenets#^no-many-worlds|No Many Worlds]]:** Memory presupposes a single actual past—when you remember your wedding, you remember it as having actually occurred, not as one branch among many. An MWI defender might reply that branch-relative memory works fine: in your branch, your wedding did actually occur. The Map responds that the *feeling of actuality* built into the pastness quale points to genuine metaphysical uniqueness, not mere indexical location within a branching structure. The Map's single-history metaphysics makes the asymmetry comprehensible: we can't pre-experience the future because it doesn't exist yet.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]:** A simpler universe might have time-symmetric cognition. That our minds are asymmetric suggests reality has structure that simple physical description misses.

## What Would Challenge This View?

Several findings would require revision: genuine pre-experience (the pastness quale applied to events that hadn't occurred, phenomenologically identical to memory); symmetric AI temporal processing (suggesting the asymmetry is purely structural); retrocausality affecting memory (future events causing present brain states, providing a mechanism for future-traces); contemplative dissolution of the pastness/futuricity distinction (though traditions generally confirm rather than dissolve it); or functional memory without the pastness quale (suggesting the quale is separable from causal contact—the Map predicts this is impossible for conscious systems).

## Further Reading

- [[voids|Voids in the Map]] — The broader framework for investigating cognitive limits
- [[temporal-consciousness-void]] — Consciousness confined to the present; complements this article's focus on past/future asymmetry
- [[autonoetic-consciousness]] — The self-knowing awareness that enables mental time travel
- [[episodic-memory]] — The memory system that preserves experienced events
- [[prospective-memory]] — Future-directed memory and its phenomenology
- [[temporal-consciousness]] — How time structures conscious experience
- [[philosophy-of-time]] — McTaggart's A/B series, presentism, and the growing block
- [[phenomenology-of-the-edge]] — What happens when consciousness approaches limits
- [[thoughts-that-slip-away]] — Related phenomenology of cognitive limitation
- [[mysterianism]] — Cognitive closure and the limits of understanding
- [[illusionism]] — The challenge that temporal qualia are mere functional markers
- [[apophatic-approaches]] — Methods for engaging with what exceeds articulation
- [[limits-reveal-structure]] — How boundaries illuminate architecture
- [[introspection]] — First-person access to temporal experience
- [[qualia]] — Irreducible qualities of experience, including pastness
- [[tenets|Site Tenets]] — The foundational commitments shaping this investigation

## References

- De Brigard, F. (2020). The phenomenology of remembering is an epistemic feeling. *Frontiers in Psychology*, 11, 1531.
- Hoerl, C. (2018). Remembering past experiences. In K. Michaelian et al. (eds.), *New Directions in the Philosophy of Memory*. Routledge.
- Husserl, E. (1991). *On the Phenomenology of the Consciousness of Internal Time* (trans. Brough). Kluwer.
- McGinn, C. (1989). Can We Solve the Mind-Body Problem? *Mind*, 98, 349-366.
- Price, H. & Weslake, B. (2009). The time-asymmetry of causation. In H. Beebee et al. (eds.), *The Oxford Handbook of Causation*. Oxford University Press.
- Schacter, D.L. & Addis, D.R. (2007). The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory. *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B*, 362(1481), 773-786.
- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Temporal Consciousness. https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/consciousness-temporal/
- Tulving, E. (1985). Memory and consciousness. *Canadian Psychology*, 26(1), 1-12.
- Whitehead, A.N. (1929). *Process and Reality*. Macmillan.
