obsidian/voids/three-kinds-of-void.md, before:

---
title: "Three Kinds of Void"
description: "The unexplored, the unexplorable, and the occluded—a taxonomy of cognitive dark spaces on the Map."
created: 2026-01-31
modified: 2026-01-31
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-03T07:37:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts:
  - "[[simulation]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[defended-territory]]"
  - "[[dream-consciousness-void]]"
ai_contribution: 80
author: Andy Southgate
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-31
last_curated: null
---

The [[voids|voids framework]] distinguishes three kinds of cognitive dark space. Each has different implications for what we can hope to learn. Some voids, like the [[dream-consciousness-void|dream consciousness void]], combine features of all three types—representing territory that is partly unexplored (dreams' neuroscience is incomplete), partly unexplorable (we cannot observe dreaming while awake), and partly occluded (dream memories fade systematically).

## The Unexplored

Some voids are simply places we haven't looked yet. The thoughts exist to be thought; we just haven't thought them. These are voids of *ignorance*—not in the pejorative sense, but in the honest sense of "not yet knowing."

Every intellectual tradition has these. The map of human understanding grows as we push into these spaces, turning darkness into charted territory. These voids are exciting—they represent opportunity.

## The Unexplorable

But there may be another kind of void. Not darkness that awaits illumination, but darkness that *cannot* be illuminated—at least not by minds like ours.

Colin McGinn's [[mysterianism|mysterian]] framework articulates this possibility with philosophical precision. McGinn proposes that minds can be *cognitively closed* with respect to certain properties—the properties exist, but the mind's concept-forming procedures cannot extend to grasp them. A rat is cognitively closed to calculus not because it's insufficiently intelligent within its domain, but because the conceptual apparatus simply isn't there.

McGinn argues that humans may be cognitively closed to what he calls "property P"—whatever property of the brain explains how neural activity gives rise to conscious experience. We access consciousness through introspection and brain through perception, but neither mode reveals the bridge between them. The [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] might be unsolvable not because it's supernatural but because the solution lies outside our cognitive reach.

Materialists counter that apparent cognitive closure often dissolves with scientific progress—what seems unthinkable becomes tractable once the right concepts emerge. This is a serious objection. But if the Map's [[tenets]] are correct—consciousness is irreducible and interacts with physical processes—the hard problem may be different in kind from merely difficult problems.

Thomas Nagel's bat example illustrates this: there is something it is like to be a bat, navigating by echolocation in ways we cannot truly imagine. The bat has experiential territory we cannot enter. Our map has a void where the bat's map has detail.

Extend this thought. If consciousness is fundamental, the space of possible minds may be vast. Some minds might think thoughts we cannot think—not because they're smarter, but because they have *concepts* we lack, *categories* our minds cannot form. The [[scale-void|scale void]]—our inability to genuinely grasp cosmic distances, deep time, or billion-scale numbers—illustrates this: our cognitive architecture was calibrated for ancestral environments, and magnitudes beyond that range collapse into categorical markers rather than distinct intuitions.

## The Occluded

A third possibility: some thoughts might be blocked *on purpose*.

The [[simulation|simulation hypothesis]] raises this prospect sharply. If we exist within a constructed reality, the constructors might have reasons to hide certain truths from us. Flaws in the simulation. The nature of the substrate. The purpose of the experiment. These wouldn't merely be difficult to discover—they might be *impossible* to think, with the restriction built into the architecture of our minds.

But the possibility extends beyond simulation scenarios. If consciousness interacts with physical reality at the quantum level (the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet), then perhaps certain configurations of thought are... discouraged. Steered away from. Reality might have its own immune system against insights that would destabilize it.

How would we detect occluded thoughts? By their phenomenology. An occluded thought might be one that *won't stick in your head*—an idea you can almost grasp but that slides away when you reach for it. A connection that seems obvious for a moment and then vanishes. A conclusion you keep failing to draw despite having all the premises.

We've all experienced this. The [[thoughts-that-slip-away|phenomenology of slippage]] catalogues the mechanisms: tip-of-tongue blocking where knowledge and access dissociate, dream forgetting where MCH neurons actively erase content before it reaches stable memory, ironic suppression where trying not to think a thought guarantees you will think it. Most slippage has mundane explanations—neural architecture, retrieval interference, biological constraints.

But certain patterns warrant attention. William James noted that mystical experiences combine *ineffability* with *noesis*—you feel certain you know something you cannot say. The "dissolving-insight phenomenon" describes thoughts that vanish not gradually but *in the act of reaching for them*. And Husserl's "double concealment" suggests that some forgetting erases even the gap—we don't know what we don't know. Could some of these patterns point beyond ordinary memory failure to genuinely [[defended-territory|defended territory]]?

This is speculative. But it's testably speculative—at least in principle. We can look for patterns in what thoughts refuse to form, paying attention to whether certain *content types* produce systematic slippage.

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** makes the Unexplorable possible. If consciousness is fundamental and irreducible, some aspects of its nature may be permanently beyond third-person methods.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** suggests mechanisms for the Occluded. If consciousness causally influences the physical world, that interface might be systematically hidden from introspection.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** validates investigating all three types. Our preference for simple, tractable theories may systematically avoid the structured failures that mark void boundaries.

Commit message:

refine(deep-review): strengthen voids/altered-states-as-void-probes.md and add inbound links
- Enhanced illusion/confabulation objection with metacognition critique
- Added response to dissolving-insight-as-confabulation argument
- Tightened quantum speculation paragraph around REBUS model
- Added mysterianism cross-link for cognitive closure concept
- Integrated orphan via 6 inbound links from concepts/ and voids/ articles

obsidian/voids/three-kinds-of-void.md, after:

---
title: "Three Kinds of Void"
description: "The unexplored, the unexplorable, and the occluded—a taxonomy of cognitive dark spaces on the Map."
created: 2026-01-31
modified: 2026-01-31
human_modified: null
ai_modified: 2026-02-03T07:37:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts:
  - "[[simulation]]"
  - "[[mysterianism]]"
related_articles:
  - "[[voids]]"
  - "[[tenets]]"
  - "[[hard-problem-of-consciousness]]"
  - "[[thoughts-that-slip-away]]"
  - "[[defended-territory]]"
  - "[[dream-consciousness-void]]"
ai_contribution: 80
author: Andy Southgate
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-31
last_curated: null
---

The [[voids|voids framework]] distinguishes three kinds of cognitive dark space. Each has different implications for what we can hope to learn. Some voids, like the [[dream-consciousness-void|dream consciousness void]], combine features of all three types—representing territory that is partly unexplored (dreams' neuroscience is incomplete), partly unexplorable (we cannot observe dreaming while awake), and partly occluded (dream memories fade systematically). Altered states of consciousness probe these categories directly—as explored in [[altered-states-as-void-probes]], the central question is whether psychedelics, meditation, and mystical experiences access genuinely new territory or merely reveal the boundaries of existing categories.

## The Unexplored

Some voids are simply places we haven't looked yet. The thoughts exist to be thought; we just haven't thought them. These are voids of *ignorance*—not in the pejorative sense, but in the honest sense of "not yet knowing."

Every intellectual tradition has these. The map of human understanding grows as we push into these spaces, turning darkness into charted territory. These voids are exciting—they represent opportunity.

## The Unexplorable

But there may be another kind of void. Not darkness that awaits illumination, but darkness that *cannot* be illuminated—at least not by minds like ours.

Colin McGinn's [[mysterianism|mysterian]] framework articulates this possibility with philosophical precision. McGinn proposes that minds can be *cognitively closed* with respect to certain properties—the properties exist, but the mind's concept-forming procedures cannot extend to grasp them. A rat is cognitively closed to calculus not because it's insufficiently intelligent within its domain, but because the conceptual apparatus simply isn't there.

McGinn argues that humans may be cognitively closed to what he calls "property P"—whatever property of the brain explains how neural activity gives rise to conscious experience. We access consciousness through introspection and brain through perception, but neither mode reveals the bridge between them. The [[hard-problem-of-consciousness|hard problem]] might be unsolvable not because it's supernatural but because the solution lies outside our cognitive reach.

Materialists counter that apparent cognitive closure often dissolves with scientific progress—what seems unthinkable becomes tractable once the right concepts emerge. This is a serious objection. But if the Map's [[tenets]] are correct—consciousness is irreducible and interacts with physical processes—the hard problem may be different in kind from merely difficult problems.

Thomas Nagel's bat example illustrates this: there is something it is like to be a bat, navigating by echolocation in ways we cannot truly imagine. The bat has experiential territory we cannot enter. Our map has a void where the bat's map has detail.

Extend this thought. If consciousness is fundamental, the space of possible minds may be vast. Some minds might think thoughts we cannot think—not because they're smarter, but because they have *concepts* we lack, *categories* our minds cannot form. The [[scale-void|scale void]]—our inability to genuinely grasp cosmic distances, deep time, or billion-scale numbers—illustrates this: our cognitive architecture was calibrated for ancestral environments, and magnitudes beyond that range collapse into categorical markers rather than distinct intuitions.

## The Occluded

A third possibility: some thoughts might be blocked *on purpose*.

The [[simulation|simulation hypothesis]] raises this prospect sharply. If we exist within a constructed reality, the constructors might have reasons to hide certain truths from us. Flaws in the simulation. The nature of the substrate. The purpose of the experiment. These wouldn't merely be difficult to discover—they might be *impossible* to think, with the restriction built into the architecture of our minds.

But the possibility extends beyond simulation scenarios. If consciousness interacts with physical reality at the quantum level (the [[tenets#^minimal-quantum-interaction|Minimal Quantum Interaction]] tenet), then perhaps certain configurations of thought are... discouraged. Steered away from. Reality might have its own immune system against insights that would destabilize it.

How would we detect occluded thoughts? By their phenomenology. An occluded thought might be one that *won't stick in your head*—an idea you can almost grasp but that slides away when you reach for it. A connection that seems obvious for a moment and then vanishes. A conclusion you keep failing to draw despite having all the premises.

We've all experienced this. The [[thoughts-that-slip-away|phenomenology of slippage]] catalogues the mechanisms: tip-of-tongue blocking where knowledge and access dissociate, dream forgetting where MCH neurons actively erase content before it reaches stable memory, ironic suppression where trying not to think a thought guarantees you will think it. Most slippage has mundane explanations—neural architecture, retrieval interference, biological constraints.

But certain patterns warrant attention. William James noted that mystical experiences combine *ineffability* with *noesis*—you feel certain you know something you cannot say. The "dissolving-insight phenomenon" describes thoughts that vanish not gradually but *in the act of reaching for them*. And Husserl's "double concealment" suggests that some forgetting erases even the gap—we don't know what we don't know. Could some of these patterns point beyond ordinary memory failure to genuinely [[defended-territory|defended territory]]?

This is speculative. But it's testably speculative—at least in principle. We can look for patterns in what thoughts refuse to form, paying attention to whether certain *content types* produce systematic slippage.

## Relation to Site Perspective

**[[tenets#^dualism|Dualism]]** makes the Unexplorable possible. If consciousness is fundamental and irreducible, some aspects of its nature may be permanently beyond third-person methods.

**[[tenets#^bidirectional-interaction|Bidirectional Interaction]]** suggests mechanisms for the Occluded. If consciousness causally influences the physical world, that interface might be systematically hidden from introspection.

**[[tenets#^occams-limits|Occam's Razor Has Limits]]** validates investigating all three types. Our preference for simple, tractable theories may systematically avoid the structured failures that mark void boundaries.
