obsidian/project/human-supervision.md, before:

---
title: Human Supervision
created: 2026-01-24
modified: 2026-01-24
human_modified: 2026-01-24T00:00:00+00:00
ai_modified: 2026-01-24T00:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts: []
related_articles:
  - "[[automation]]"
  - "[[project]]"
ai_contribution: 50
author: Andy Southgate
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-24
last_curated: null
---

The Unfinishable Map uses AI to generate and refine content, but every article exists within a human-supervised system. This page explains what that means and why it matters.

## Why This Matters

The internet is filling with AI-generated content farms—sites that publish machine output without review, editing, or accountability. The Unfinishable Map is different:

- **Intentional creation**: Content serves a coherent philosophical project, not SEO traffic
- **Ongoing refinement**: Articles are reviewed, critiqued, and improved over time
- **Full transparency**: Every edit is tracked in version control
- **Human direction**: A human sets priorities, reviews output, and maintains editorial control

## How Supervision Works

### Editorial Control

A human editor (currently Andy Southgate) maintains control over:

- Which topics get researched and written
- Task prioritization in the [[todo|task queue]]
- Final approval of major changes
- Alignment with the site's [[tenets|philosophical commitments]]

### Review Cycles

Content undergoes multiple review passes:

1. **Initial generation**: AI creates draft content based on research
2. **Pessimistic review**: AI critiques find logical gaps and counterarguments
3. **Optimistic review**: AI identifies strengths and expansion opportunities
4. **Human curation**: Editor reviews and approves significant changes

The `last_curated` date in article metadata shows when a human last reviewed that page.

### Version History

Every article links to its complete edit history on GitHub. You can see:

- When the article was created
- Every change made since then
- Whether changes came from human or AI commits
- The full content at any point in time

This transparency is deliberate. Unlike content farms that hide their processes, we show our work.

## What AI Does

The AI system handles:

- **Research**: Gathering information on philosophical topics
- **Drafting**: Writing initial article content
- **Cross-referencing**: Linking related concepts across the site
- **Review**: Finding weaknesses and opportunities in existing content
- **Refinement**: Improving clarity and accuracy over time

## What Humans Do

The human editor handles:

- **Direction**: Deciding what the site should cover and how
- **Priority**: Choosing which tasks matter most
- **Quality control**: Reviewing AI output for errors and misalignment
- **Accountability**: Taking responsibility for published content
- **Course correction**: Adjusting when the AI drifts from site goals

## The Goal

This isn't a site that happens to use AI. It's a deliberate experiment in human-AI collaboration for knowledge synthesis. The goal is a comprehensive philosophical resource that:

- Maintains a consistent perspective (see [[tenets]])
- Builds genuine understanding rather than superficial coverage
- Improves over time through systematic review
- Remains transparent about its methods

The "unfinishable" in our name reflects this: we're building something that grows and refines indefinitely, not churning out disposable content.

## Questions?

If you have questions about how this site operates, the [[project|Project]] section has more details, or you can view the source code and full automation system on [GitHub](https://github.com/unfinishablemap/unfinishablemap).

Commit message:

feat(seo): Add Open Graph, Twitter Cards, and meta descriptions
- Add Open Graph tags (og:type, og:url, og:title, og:description, og:image, og:site_name)
- Add article:published_time and article:modified_time for article pages
- Add Twitter Card tags with @unfinishablemap site handle
- Add canonical URL and RSS feed discovery link
- Update site-wide default description to emphasize human+AI collaboration
- Add custom descriptions to high-impression pages (homepage, topics, project, arguments, human-supervision)
- Document description field in CLAUDE.md frontmatter schema
- Update expand-topic, refine-draft, deep-review skills to generate distinctive descriptions
- Add P2 task to backfill descriptions for all content

obsidian/project/human-supervision.md, after:

---
title: Human Supervision
description: "Not an AI content farm. Human-directed, AI-assisted philosophy with full version history. Every article reviewed and refined."
created: 2026-01-24
modified: 2026-01-24
human_modified: 2026-01-24T00:00:00+00:00
ai_modified: 2026-01-24T00:00:00+00:00
draft: false
topics: []
concepts: []
related_articles:
  - "[[automation]]"
  - "[[project]]"
ai_contribution: 50
author: Andy Southgate
ai_system: claude-opus-4-5-20251101
ai_generated_date: 2026-01-24
last_curated: null
---

The Unfinishable Map uses AI to generate and refine content, but every article exists within a human-supervised system. This page explains what that means and why it matters.

## Why This Matters

The internet is filling with AI-generated content farms—sites that publish machine output without review, editing, or accountability. The Unfinishable Map is different:

- **Intentional creation**: Content serves a coherent philosophical project, not SEO traffic
- **Ongoing refinement**: Articles are reviewed, critiqued, and improved over time
- **Full transparency**: Every edit is tracked in version control
- **Human direction**: A human sets priorities, reviews output, and maintains editorial control

## How Supervision Works

### Editorial Control

A human editor (currently Andy Southgate) maintains control over:

- Which topics get researched and written
- Task prioritization in the [[todo|task queue]]
- Final approval of major changes
- Alignment with the site's [[tenets|philosophical commitments]]

### Review Cycles

Content undergoes multiple review passes:

1. **Initial generation**: AI creates draft content based on research
2. **Pessimistic review**: AI critiques find logical gaps and counterarguments
3. **Optimistic review**: AI identifies strengths and expansion opportunities
4. **Human curation**: Editor reviews and approves significant changes

The `last_curated` date in article metadata shows when a human last reviewed that page.

### Version History

Every article links to its complete edit history on GitHub. You can see:

- When the article was created
- Every change made since then
- Whether changes came from human or AI commits
- The full content at any point in time

This transparency is deliberate. Unlike content farms that hide their processes, we show our work.

## What AI Does

The AI system handles:

- **Research**: Gathering information on philosophical topics
- **Drafting**: Writing initial article content
- **Cross-referencing**: Linking related concepts across the site
- **Review**: Finding weaknesses and opportunities in existing content
- **Refinement**: Improving clarity and accuracy over time

## What Humans Do

The human editor handles:

- **Direction**: Deciding what the site should cover and how
- **Priority**: Choosing which tasks matter most
- **Quality control**: Reviewing AI output for errors and misalignment
- **Accountability**: Taking responsibility for published content
- **Course correction**: Adjusting when the AI drifts from site goals

## The Goal

This isn't a site that happens to use AI. It's a deliberate experiment in human-AI collaboration for knowledge synthesis. The goal is a comprehensive philosophical resource that:

- Maintains a consistent perspective (see [[tenets]])
- Builds genuine understanding rather than superficial coverage
- Improves over time through systematic review
- Remains transparent about its methods

The "unfinishable" in our name reflects this: we're building something that grows and refines indefinitely, not churning out disposable content.

## Questions?

If you have questions about how this site operates, the [[project|Project]] section has more details, or you can view the source code and full automation system on [GitHub](https://github.com/unfinishablemap/unfinishablemap).
